AHSC 510 "Advanced Research Methods in Youth Work" "This course reviews approaches to applied research that are applicable to youth work practice. Students compare a range of methodological approaches, explore definitions of evidence-based practice and learn techniques for collecting, analyzing and disseminating qualitative and quantitative data. Students undertake an applied research project, relevant to an area of practice or programs of intervention with youth. Emphasis is placed on ethical issues, developmentally appropriate research practices, and accountability."
AHSC 520 "Psychoeducation and Youth Work Ethics in Practice" "This course provides an introduction to applied ethics in youth work with a focus on the Code of Ethics of theOrdre des psychoducateurs et psychoducatrices du Qubec. It also reviews the policy, legislative and organizational contexts of the practice of psychoeducation and youth work, and considers the ways in which models of ethical decision making inform practice. Topics include confidentiality and information sharing in inter-professional contexts, balancing issues of control, empowerment and education, developing critical reflexivity, and appreciating the complexities and dilemmas inherent in youth work practice."
AHSC 522 "Fundamentals of Child and Youth Care Work" "This course provides students with an understanding of the scope and status of child and youth care work, sensitizes them to the necessary competencies and daily challenges of this work in a range of settings, and reviews relevant theory. Intervention planning in the context of psychoeducation and relational child and youth care work is emphasized."
AHSC 525 "Individual and Group Intervention with Youth" "Prerequisite: AHSC 522 previously or concurrently.  A main focus of this course is to develop skills in relationship building and communication with youth. A micro-skills approach is introduced, as well as principles of group leadership and crisis intervention with youth. Principles of reflexive youth work, including developmentally-informed group leadership, are also covered."
AHSC 527 "Advanced Youth Work Intervention: Case Management and Supervision" "Prerequisite: AHSC 525.  This course explores the fundamental concepts and theories of case management and supervision as applied to youth work practice. Topics include supervisory relationship and process issues, self-care, ethical and professional considerations, leadership and mentoring relationships, multi-disciplinary teams and teamwork, managing change, debriefing in response to a crisis and developing, implementing and monitoring effective and collaborative case plans with young people and their families."
AHSC 530 "Community Youth Development" "Prerequisite: AHSC 525.  This course explores both historical and contemporary foundations of non-formal, community-based youth development in Canada and internationally. It focuses on creating opportunities for youth to engage with individuals, organizations and institutions at the community level. Various community youth development models are explored in-depth with practical applications for community-based youth programs, including life skills, assets, resiliency, and ecological models. Emphasis is placed on research, theory and practice applied in community youth development environments."
AHSC 540 "Mental Health and Addictions: Youth Work Perspectives, Policies and Practices" "Prerequisite: AHSC 525.  This course explores the precursors, presentations, nature and impacts of mental health concerns and addictions for youth, their families, and within communities. Students have the opportunity to develop, and apply within the classroom, knowledge and skills related to addictions and mental illness prevention, assessmentand intervention, and mental health promotion. Topics include an introduction to adolescent psychopathology; diagnosis, assessment, and current policy and practices in relation to the current edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association (DSM); the uses of standardized testing to evaluate adaptation;psychopharmacology;suicide;evidence-based and alternative treatment interventions (e.g., psychoeducational approaches;dialectical behaviour therapy);ethical and legislative considerations;and the roles/responsibilities of youth workers in the inter-professional and community care of adolescents with mental health and/or addictions concerns."
AHSC 565 "Parent-Child Relations" "This course provides an advanced understanding of parenting theories, research, and applications in the context of parent-child relations over the life span. Topics include parenting rights and responsibilities, parenting practices and programs, high-risk parenting, issues in the transition from parenting children to parenting adolescents and parental assessment."
AHSC 512 "Sexuality in Human Relations" "This course provides students with knowledge of physical and psychosocial aspects of sexuality in relationships through life and specifically during adolescence with an examination of values, attitudes, and issues related to the development and expression of sexuality. Topics include gender identity development, fuzzy identities, teen pregnancy, family, cultural and media influences; historically and culturally based attitudes; prevention and sexually transmitted diseases; self-perception and identity in sexuality; sexual diversity; and emotion and sexuality. The course aims to foster respect for persons and diversity."
AHSC 513 "Family Communication" "This course is an examination of patterns, effective approaches, and issues in communication among persons in primary partnerships and families with adolescents. It also explores topics such as diversity in forms of family, decision-making, problem-solving, power relations, gender issues, managing differences in expectations, and the influences of cultural, social, and economic contexts. Interventions for youth work practice designed to enhance communication and strengthen the parent-youth bond are explored."
AHSC 551 "Counselling Skills and Concepts" "This course advances students understanding of core counselling theories and develops an understanding for theoretical and value frameworks of the youth work therapeutic relationship. It fosters the application of essential helping skills for relational practice within youth work settings. Skill areas include attending skills, such as attending to nonverbal behaviour, reflection of content, reflection of feeling, paraphrasing and summarizing, empathy, selfdisclosure; and influencing skills, such as interpretation and analysis. Also highlighted are ethical issues, attention to cultural differences, and practitioner reflexivity."
AHSC 560 "Health Promotion" "This course helps students to develop intervention skills and theoretical understanding in the area of health promotion across the lifespan. It is of particular interest to youth work students whose career interests involve lifestyle planning, health and wellness promotion, and stress management with young people. A holistic approach including cultural and developmental understandings are discussed in relation to the following topics: health and wellness, stress and illness, psychological and physical selfappraisal processes, psychosomatic processes and disorders, understanding addictions and their management, interventions to promote health and wellness, behavioural selfmanagement, and issues in medical/psychological health compliance."
AHSC 598 "Special Topics in Youth Work" "Specific topics for this course and prerequisites relevant in each case are stated in the Graduate Class Schedule."
AHSC 599 "Independent Study" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department.  Students work on topics in consultation with a study supervisor. The study may include readings, field studies, and/or research."
AHSC 533 "Internship I in Youth Work" "Prerequisites: AHSC 522, 525."
JOUR 500 "Critical Approaches to Journalism" "This course introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. By interrogating specific readings, students are encouraged to consider the journalist as a cultural producer operating within overlapping social, political and economic contexts."
JOUR 502 "Introduction to Reporting" "This is a comprehensive lecture/laboratory course which lays the foundations for the writing and reporting demands of journalism. Students are introduced to the salient features of print and digitalformats, and receive assignments in information-gathering and writing both in class and in the field."
JOUR 504 "IntermediateReporting " "Prerequisite: JOUR 502.  Thiscourse is intended to consolidate thereporting andwriting skills learned during the summer. Through lectures and laboratory work, studentsexpand their knowledgeof information-gathering and writing techniques, including short deadline news reporting and feature writing."
JOUR 505 "Advanced Reporting" "This workshop offers students the opportunity to perfect theirreporting and writing skills and to undertake long form writingprojects,ranging from beat reporting to magazine writing."
JOUR 508 "Research Project" "The project is to be a comprehensive study and report on some area of modern media practice, or on the interaction of media and society. The subject and method must be approved in advance by the instructor of the course."
JOUR 511 "Introduction to Multimedia" "Thiscourse is an introduction to theuse of technology across audio andvisual newsplatforms, including audio, visual and digital equipment and software. Students learn the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories."
JOUR 513 "Journalism Ethics and the Law" "This course examines the journalists responsibility in terms of both ethics and the law. It introduces students to a representative cross-section of ethical theories and codes and takes an intensive look at the most common legal issues affecting the practice of journalism."
JOUR 528 "The DigitalMagazine" "Thiscourserequiresstudents toproduce the Departments Digital Magazine.The course replicates the working conditions and journalistic experience of a digital newsroom. Students are expected to work in editorial teams to create current and update multimedia content throughout the term."
JOUR 530 "Advanced Radio News" "This is a workshop course in which students function as reporters, writers, news readers and editors in order to learn the skills necessary to produce daily newscasts."
JOUR 532 "Documentary Video and Radio" "Thisworkshop allows students to perfect their skills in long format public affairs broadcasting insound and pictures. Students learn the fundamentals of documentary production including story developments and treatment,cinematographicstyle, interviewing, editing and presentation."
JOUR 542 "International Journalism " "This course examines the way journalism is practiced in a selected country or tradition. The focus of the course may change from year to year."
JOUR 566 "Photojournalism" "Using digital cameras and technology, students perform a variety of exercises and assignments to help them master the techniques used in planning, taking, and laying out news photographs."
FTRA 600 "Mthodologie gnrale de la recherche en traduction" "Bloc B (9 cr. au choix)"
FTRA 601 "Courants contemporains en traductologie" "FTRA 602 Histoire gnrale de la traduction(3 crdits)"
FTRA 636 "Informatique et traduction" "FTRA 638 Initiation au sous-titrage(3crdits)"
FTRA 611 "Terminologie et mondialisation" "FTRA 612 Traduction avance en sciences humaines et sociales (F)(3 crdits)"
FTRA 614 "Traduction littraire avance (F)" "ou"
FTRA 623 "Traduction scientifique et technique du franais  langlais" "ou"
FTRA 625 "Traduction commerciale et juridique du franais  langlais" "ou"
FTRA 629 "Rvision et correction en traduction (A)" "ou"
FTRA 631 "Initiation  la traduction gnrale (A)" "ou"
FTRA 633 "Aspects thoriques et pratiques de la terminologie" "FTRA 634 Traduction littraire de langlais au franais(3 crdits)"
FTRA 647 "Traduction conomique du franais  langlais (A)" "ou"
FTRA 600 "Mthodologie gnrale de la recherche en traduction" "FTRA 601 Courants contemporains en traductologie(3 crdits)"
FTRA 686 "Projet de mmoire " "FTRA 692 Mmoire (24 crdits)"
FTRA 600 "Mthodologie gnrale de la recherche en traduction " "Co-list: FTRA 500."
FTRA 601 "Courants contemporains en traductologie" "Co-list: FTRA 539."
FTRA 602 "Histoire gnrale de la traduction " "Ce sminaire est une introduction  lhistoire gnrale de la traduction, notamment (mais non exclusivement) en Occident,ainsi qu lvolution des approches historiographiques.Une vue en coupe est prsente  travers des thmatiques permettant de dgager le rle historique jou par les traducteurs comme acteurs sociaux proches des pouvoirs en place ou critiques de ces pouvoirs. Laccentestmis sur la crativit des traducteurs  certaines poques cls de contacts entre des cultures. Le sminairepeutabordercertains domaines prcis de la traduction et des travaux mens  despriodeshistoriquesetdans desairesgographiques donnes."
FTRA 603 "Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction" "Co-list: FTRA 553."
FTRA 610 "Lecture critique de traductions" "Co-list: FTRA 540."
FTRA 611 "Terminologie et mondialisation" "Co-list: FTRA 534."
FTRA 612 "Traduction avance en sciences humaines et sociales (F) " "FTRA 613 Advanced translation in social sciences and the humanities (A) (3 crdits)"
FTRA 614 "Traduction littraire avance (F) " "FTRA 615 Advanced literary translation (A) (3 crdits)"
FTRA 622 "Littrature, langue, traduction" "Co-list: FLIT 622."
FTRA 624 "Traduction scientifique et technique de langlais au franais" "Co-list: FTRA 514."
FTRA 626 "Traduction commerciale et juridique de langlais au franais" "Co-list: FTRA 516."
FTRA 629 "Rvision et correction en traduction (A)" "Co-list: FTRA 529."
FTRA 630 "Rvision et correction en traduction (F)" "Co-list: FTRA 530."
FTRA 631 "Initiation  la traduction gnrale (A)" "Co-list :FTRA 531."
FTRA 632 "Initiation  la traduction gnrale (F)" "Co-list:FTRA 532."
FTRA 633 "Aspects thoriques et pratiques de la terminologie" "Co-list:FTRA 533."
FTRA 634 "Traduction littraire de langlais au franais" "Co-list: FTRA 504."
FTRA 635 "Traduction littraire du franais  langlais" "Co-list: FTRA 501."
FTRA 636 "Informatique et traduction" "Co-list: FTRA 536."
FTRA 638 "Initiation au sous-titrage" "Co-list: FTRA 538."
FTRA 647 "Traduction conomique du franais  langlais" "Co-list: FTRA 547."
FTRA 648 "Traduction conomique de langlais au franais (F)" "Co-list: FTRA 548."
FTRA 652 "Traduction assiste par ordinateur (TAO)et post dition" "Co-list :FTRA 552."
FTRA 655 "Gestion de projets" "Co-list :FTRA 555."
FTRA 658 "Pratique de la localisation" "Co-list :FTRA 558."
FTRA 668 "Web, technologies, traduction : thories et critiques" "Co-list : FTRA 568."
FTRA 680 "Tutorat en littrature (F)" "FTRA 681 Tutorial in literature (A) (3 crdits)"
FTRA 698 "tude dun sujet particulier / Special Topics" "Ce cours pourra porter sur tout sujet en littrature, traduction ou linguistique qui ne figure pas dj au programme. Le but du cours est de favoriser une approche pluridisciplinaire et de permettre linnovation pdagogique."
FTRA 686 "Projet de mmoire " "FTRA 692 Mmoire (24 crdits)"
FRAA 523 "Rdaction II " "Ce cours vise lapprofondissement des comptences rdactionnelles par lapprentissage de techniques de recherche documentaire et de synthese textuelle, et par lcriture de textes combinant ces techniques comme le compte rendu critique, le dossier ou le texte de vulgarisation."
FTRA 500 "Mthodologie gnrale de la recherche en traduction" "Co-list: FTRA 600."
FTRA 501 "Traduction littraire du franais  langlais" "Co-list: FTRA 635."
FTRA 504 "Traduction littraire de langlais au franais " "Co-list: FTRA 634."
FTRA 514 "Traduction scientifique et technique de langlais au franais " "Co-list: FTRA 624."
FTRA 515 "Traduction commerciale et juridique du franais  langlais " "Co-list: FTRA 625."
FTRA 516 "Traduction commerciale et juridique de langlais au franais" "Co-list: FTRA 626."
FTRA 517 "Stage de formation du franais  langlais I (A) " "FTRA 519 Stage de formation du franais  langlais II (A) (3 crdits)"
FTRA 529 "Rvision et correction en traduction (A) " "Co-list: FTRA 629."
FTRA 530 "Rvision et correction en traduction (F) " "Co-list: FTRA 630."
FTRA 531 "Initiation  la traduction gnrale (A)" "Co-list:FTRA 631."
FTRA 532 "Initiation  la traduction gnrale (F)" "Co-list:FTRA 632."
FTRA 533 "Aspects thoriques et pratiques de la terminologie" "Co-list: FTRA 633."
FTRA 534 "Terminologie et mondialisation" "Co-list: FTRA 611."
FTRA 536 "Informatique et traduction " "Co-list: FTRA 636."
FTRA 538 "Initiation au sous-titrage" "Co-list:FTRA 638."
FTRA 539 "Courants contemporains en traductologie " "Co-list: FTRA 601."
FTRA 540 "Lecture critique de traductions" "Co-list: FTRA 610."
FTRA 542 "Traduction avance en sciences humaines et sociales (F)" "FTRA 543 Advanced Translation in Social Sciences and the Humanities (A) (3 crdits)"
FTRA 544 "Traduction littraire avance (F) " "FTRA 545 Advanced Literary Translation (A) (3 crdits)"
FTRA 547 "Traduction conomique du franais  langlais" "Co-list: FTRA 647."
FTRA 548 "Traduction conomique de langlais au franais (F)" "Co-list: FTRA 648."
FTRA 549 "Sociologie de la traduction littraire" "Ce sminaire applique la mthode sociologique  la traduction des genres et des discours de la littrature. Peuvent tre tudis des corpus divers (roman, posie, thtre, par exemple) traduits de langlais en franais et du franais en anglais. Seront examines, par exemple, les thories de Pierre Bourdieu, de Niklas Luhmann ou de Bruno Latour. Le sminaire est loccasion dune remise en question des notions de source et de cible en traduction."
FTRA 552 "Traduction assiste par ordinateur (TAO)et post dition" "Co-list: FTRA 652."
FTRA 553 "Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction" "Co-list:FTRA 603."
FTRA 555 "Gestion de projets " "Co-list: FTRA 655."
FTRA 558 "Pratique de la localisation " "Co-list: FTRA 658."
FTRA 559 "Stage en gestion de projet" "FTRA 560 Stage en gestion de projet I(3 crdits)"
FTRA 561 "Stage en gestion de projet II" "FRAA 598 tude avance dun sujet particulier (3 crdits)"
FTRA 598 "tude avance dun sujet particulier " ""
THEO 621 "Old Testament I" "THEO 623 Old Testament II"
THEO 641 "History I" "THEO 643 History II"
THEO 651 "Theology I" "THEO 653 Theology II"
THEO 671 "Ethics I" "THEO 673 Ethics II"
THEO 603 "Method in Theology " "This courseintroducesstudentsto theological method: the questions, insights, and philosophical presuppositions that determine theological frameworks with some attention to modern systematic theology and Christian ethics. Students acquire a differentiated appreciation for the types of theology, the scope of distincttheological fields, and their research horizons."
THEO 604 "Theological Hermeneutics " "This courseintroducesstudents to the notion of church as interpretative community, and to experience diverse ways ofutilizingthis notion.Students develop an understanding of the basic principles of theological hermeneutics (the science or theory of interpretation), including a survey of the history of the disciple from early times up to present day."
THEO 605 "Methods in Biblical Studies" "This course focuses on tools and methods employed in biblical studies and ancient literature related to the Bible (up to 600 CE). Synchronic and diachronic approaches are discussed but the course focuses primarily on diachronic methods (form and genre criticism, comparative method, etc.) Students are trained to develop skills in analyzing texts using biblical methods."
THEO 690 "Annotated Bibliography and Thesis Proposal" "The annotated bibliography and thesis proposal constitute preliminary phases necessary for the writing of the MA thesis. The annotated bibliography and thesis proposal are supervised by the supervisor of the thesis and are assessed on a pass/fail basis."
THEO 691 "Research Paper " "The guided research project involves the preparation of a substantial research paper. It may be prepared in conjunction with any seminar course but will be separate from the basic course requirements."
THEO 692 "Applied Project in Theology " "The aim of this course is to give the student the opportunity to engage in critical theological reflection by frequenting a milieu where theological interpretation occurs on a regular basis (e.g. a local parish, a confessional school, a religious formation program like the Christian Training Program, religious programming in the media, etc.) in order to assess the theological models presupposed in the activity studied. The practicum will include a 3 credit reading component related to the field of study."
THEO 697 "Thesis" "The thesis shall consist in the presentation of the research results. Each thesis shall be examined by a committee consisting of the students supervisor and by at least two other scholars from the Department. The remaining regulations concerning the thesis examination are in accordance with the School of Graduate Studies (See Thesis Regulations)."
SOCI 602 "Issues in Classical Sociological Theory" "This course is designed to examine selected classical texts and analyze the work of recent interpreters and critics. During this course, we will endeavour to develop our critical understanding of the classics. In addition, we will strive to create an awareness of the diversity of readings of classical texts that will enhance our ability to make further critical appropriations, revisions, and uses of the classical tradition. (3 credits)"
SOCI 603 "Issues in Contemporary Sociological Theory" "This course is an in-depth study of issues in contemporary sociological theory. It is designed to foster awareness of the plurality, diversity, and divergence among contemporary readers and readings of current texts. The focus is on critical analysis of major writings representing diverse theoretical orientations in recent sociology. Attention is given to fundamental assumptions and to practical implications of given orientations and styles of sociology."
SOCI 612 "Quantitative Research Design and Methods" "This course explores quantitative research design and methodology as a whole process, from conceptualization to research questions, methods, data analysis, and results dissemination. Topics include data structures and their relation to theory; data collection; access to and use of large data sets; coding and validity and reliability issues; statistical techniques as generalized linear models; linear and logistic regression. Students apply various methods to read data. Ethical issues are also considered."
SOCI 613 "Qualitative Research Design and Methods" "This course explores research methodology, design, analysis and dissemination. Topics include focus groups, participant observation, open-ended and structured interviewing, content and discourse analysis, life histories and historical analysis. Analysis will also explore approaches to coding qualitative data and the links between data and conceptual and theoretical categories. Ethical issues as well as issues of researcher safety in the field are considered."
SOCI 660 "Professional Development Seminar" "This seminar is designed to help students develop the professional skills needed to pursue a career in research, practice or teaching. Students are exposed to a variety of research approaches through presentations by a diversity of faculty researchers. This seminar takes place every two weeks over the course of the Fall and Winter semesters. Grading for this course is obtained on a pass/fail basis."
SOCI 690 "Thesis Proposal" "The student develops a research proposal under the direction of his/her thesis supervisor."
SOCI 691 "Thesis" "Students enrolled in the thesis option are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. The thesis proposal, SOCI 690 (prepared within the confines of the thesis tutorial) will serve as the basis for the elaboration of the actual thesis, SOCI 691. This will take the form of a written thesis (21 credits) of at least article length. The student will then orally defend the thesis before an examining committee. The thesis may be written in either English or French."
SOCI 695 "Essay" "The essay is written under the supervision of one faculty member and is evaluated by two faculty members, including the supervisor. It can either be a literature review of a substantive nature, or a report on empirical research. Students are expected to submit work of publishable or near publishable quality. The appropriate length of the essay is approximately 40 pages."
SOCI 601 "Topics in Advanced Theory" "SOCI 611 Topics in Advanced Methodology"
ANTH 600 "Identity and Difference" "This course explores the processes of social differentiation and identification."
ANTH 610 "Ethnographic Research and Ethics" "This course explores the methods used to gather ethnographic material and the ethical dynamics of the fieldwork encounter, and the duties of the anthropologist as cultural mediator."
ANTH 630 "New Directions in Anthropological Research" "This course explores emergent concepts, methods and topics in anthropology. Content changes in accordance with the research focus of the professor leading the course."
ANTH 640 "Special Topics I" "This course, selected in consultation with the students thesis supervisor, may be taken from a cognate discipline."
ANTH 641 "Special Topics II" "This course, selected in consultation with the students thesis supervisor, is offered as the occasion arises, for example, when a faculty member returns from the field, or when a visiting professor is in residence."
ANTH 660 "Professional Development Seminar" "This seminar is designed to help students develop the professional skills needed to pursue a career in research, practice or teaching. Students are exposed to a variety of research approaches through presentations by a diversity of faculty researchers. This seminar takes place every two weeks over the course of the Fall and Winter semesters. Credit for this course is obtained on a pass/fail basis."
ANTH 690 "Thesis Proposal" "The student develops a research proposal under the direction of his/her thesis supervisor."
ANTH 691 "Fieldwork: Stage" "The fieldwork requirement, which may last from 3-4 months, involves undertaking research in a community which differs in important respects from the students community of reference, and collecting ethnographic data. This research forms the basis of the students thesis."
ANTH 692 "Thesis" "The thesis is required to demonstrate that the student has been able to carry out independent field research. It should be a work of near publishable quality. The thesis is evaluated by the students Thesis Committee and one other faculty member. The student is also required to defend the thesis orally before the above-mentioned examiners."
ANTH 693 "Essay Proposal" "Students develop a research proposal under the direction of their supervisor, including a preliminary reading list."
ANTH 694 "Bibliographic Research" "Students spend two to three months reviewing the literature (which may include both academic and grey literature sources) on their proposed topic. The review forms the basis of the students' essay."
ANTH 695 "Essay" "The essay is written under the supervision of one faculty member and is evaluated by two faculty members, including the supervisor. It can either be a literature review of a substantive nature, or a report on empirical research. Students are expected to submit work of publishable or near publishable quality. The appropriate length of the essay is approximately 40 pages."
RELI 6001 "Method and Theory in the Study of Religion" "This course provides students with an understanding of the major approaches to the academic study of religion. It introduces students to key theories of religion as a social and cultural phenomenon, as well as contemporary methodologies and the ways in which they colour, control, and reflect the representation of religious experience and expression. Students develop a critical theoretical orientation for their research and a familiarity with the skills that they apply in their coursework and final project."
RELI 6012 "Jewish Texts and Literature: Interpretation and Reception" "This course analyzes the sacred texts of Judaism and its interpretation through the ages. It enables students to comprehend the historical contexts and transitions of text as shifts and adjustments prevail. Topics may also include contemporary literature and popular transmissions of foundational texts into the present."
RELI 6013 "Canadian Jewish Studies" "This course covers the history, literature and ethnography of Canada's Jews. Exploring both the experiences and expressions of Canadian Jewry, the course examines lived religion and scarcely explored communal documents. Students are exposed to a variety of methodological approaches, such as literary criticism, ethnography and historiography."
RELI 6014 "Jewish Philosophy and Ethics" "This course examines Jewish philosophy in various historical periods. Topics may include ethics, metaphysics, cosmology, Jewish thought post-Holocaust, and reflections on the State of Israel. The course may focus on select Jewish thinkers or particular philosophical corpora."
RELI 6015 "Material and Popular Culture in Judaism" "This course explores the study of Jewish history and communities through material and popular culture. Topics may include the production and use of objects, images, ornament, iconography, epigraphy, and sacred space, art, film, and music. It considers how attention to material and popular culture allows for a nuanced understanding of the complexity and variety of Jewish cultures."
RELI 6017 "Jewish Communities in Historical and Regional Contexts" "This course examines Jewish communities in particular historical and cultural regions, notably the Middle East and Israel, North America, and Eastern Europe. It emphasizes how Jewish communities have interacted with outsiders, constructed intercommunal boundaries, responded to patterns of migration and immigration, and been shaped by changing social and political circumstances in these particular locations."
RELI 6018 "Jewish Community Engagement" "Prerequisite:Permission of the Graduate Program Director."
POLI 801 "Advanced Seminar in Comparative Politics" "This course is a survey of the field of comparative politics at an advanced level. It examines major theories, concepts and methods of comparative political analysis."
POLI 802 "Advanced Seminar in International Politics" "This course is a survey of core concepts of international politics at an advanced level. It examines major theoretical perspectives and their application to historical and contemporary international issues."
POLI 803 "Advanced Seminar in Canadian and Qubec Politics" "This course is a survey of the field at an advanced level. It presents a discussion of contemporary issues and controversies in Canadian and Qubec politics."
POLI 804 "Advanced Seminar in Political Theory" "This course is a survey of leading research in political theory and political philosophy, including the history of political thought, normative political theory and contemporary political thought."
POLI 805 "Advanced Seminar in Public Policy and Public Administration" "This course surveys several theoretical models and paradigms of public policy and public administration. It examines critically the intellectual and ideological traditions of policy analysis."
POLI 844 "Research Design" "This course explores differing research philosophies, the principles of research design and research strategies. It also considers philosophical critiques of different approaches and practical aspects of conducting research."
POLI 811 "Special Topics in Comparative Politics" "Topics vary from year to year."
POLI 812 "Special Topics in International Politics" "Topics vary from year to year."
POLI 813 "Special Topics in Canadian and Qubec Politics" "Topics vary from year to year."
POLI 814 "Special Topics in Political Theory" "Topics vary from year to year."
POLI 815 "Special Topics in Public Policy and Public Administration" "Topics vary from year to year."
POLI 898 "Directed Studies" "Prerequisite:Permission of the PhD Committee. This special reading course is designed to explore topics and themes relevant to a students doctoral research."
POLI 885 "Comprehensive Exam" "POLI 886 Comprehensive Exam(6 credits)"
POLI 889 "Thesis Proposal" "POLI 890 Thesis(54 credits)"
PSYC 700 "Psychopathology" "Prerequisite: Undergraduate course in behaviour disorders or equivalent.  This seminar deals with historical and current approaches to the study of behaviour disorders and problems of life adjustment in both adults and children, including critical evaluation of empirical findings in selected areas. Classification systems, including the current revision of the APA Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, are critically reviewed. Students with credit for PSYC 660 or 860 may not take this course for credit."
PSYC 701 "Models of Assessment I" "Prerequisite:PSYC 700;Co-requisite:PSYC 706 or permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  Focusing on cognitive and ability testing of children and adults, this course stresses the conceptual bases of ability testing, research results and their implications for test interpretation, and strengths and limitations of current test batteries for children and adults. Specific course content includes: a) measurement theory, including issues of test construction, reliability, validity, and evaluation; b) appropriate use and interpretation of specific cognitive assessment batteries (e.g. the Wechsler and Stanford-Binet scales for children and adults); and c) special assessment issues, including the testing of minorities and assessment-related ethical problems. A practicum in assessment techniques (PSYC 706) is typically taken in conjunction with this course."
PSYC 714 "Central Topics in Psychology " "This general seminar deals with basic theoretical and research issues in Psychology. Topics are drawn from a wide range of areas in Psychology including perceptual and cognitive processes, learning, motivation, and psycho-pathology. Issues are considered with respect to developmental, physiological and social approaches. Students who have received credit for PSYC 602 may not take this course for credit."
PSYC 716 "Advanced Human Development" "This seminar on theory and research focuses on human development and developmental processes. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided that the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number."
PSYC 721 "Special Topics Seminar" "This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an integrative or selected area of psychology outside the departments major areas of specialization. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 722 "Focused Topic Seminar " "This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in a selected area of psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 724 "Special Topics in Clinical and Health Psychology" "This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of clinical and/or health psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 725 "Special Topics in Cognitive Science" "This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of cognitive science. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 726 "Special Topics in Human Development" "This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of human development and developmental processes. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 727 "Special Topics in Behavioural Neuroscience" "This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of behavioural neuroscience. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 734 "Multivariate Statistics" "Prerequisite: PSYC 601.  Building upon material presented in PSYC 601, this course covers latent variable analyses and multivariate procedures, including factor analysis, structural equation modelling, multiple group models, and multilevel modelling."
PSYC 801 "Research Seminar I" "A seminar attended by all doctoral students in which specific research proposals and related theoretical issues and methodological problems are presented for discussion by students and participating faculty."
PSYC 802 "Research Seminar II" "A continuation of PSYC 801."
PSYC 823 "APC Practicum III: General" "Prerequisite:PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713).Prerequisite or Co-requisite:PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum (e.g., working with children, adolescents, adults, working with clients who present particular types of problems)."
PSYC 824 "APC Practicum III: Adult" "Prerequisite:PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713).Prerequisite or Co-requisite:PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum working with adult clients, e.g. working with a particular orientation and/or with particular types of problems."
PSYC 825 "APC Practicum III: Child" "Prerequisite:PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713).Prerequisite or Co-requisite:PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum working with child clients and families, e.g. working with a particular orientation and/or with particular types of problems."
PSYC 826 "APC Practicum IV: General" "Prerequisite:PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience under supervision."
PSYC 827 "APC Practicum IV: Adult" "Prerequisite:PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience with adult clients under supervision."
PSYC 828 "APC Practicum IV: Child" "Prerequisite:PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience with child clients under supervision."
PSYC 834 "Advanced Clinical Seminar I" "Prerequisite:PSYC 711 (or 712 or 713), 708 (or 709 or 710), and permission of Director of Clinical Training.  This seminar provides an advanced treatment of issues in current psychological theory and research that are relevant to clinical practice, e.g., causal models and their assumptions, legal and ethical issues, classification by state, trait, and situational context; brain-behaviour relations. The aims are to foster in students a) regular review of clinically relevant literature; b) a critical perspective regarding current clinical practices; and c) guidelines and criteria for optimal assessment and treatment decisions tailored to the needs of clients."
PSYC 835 "Advanced Clinical Seminar II: Adult" "Prerequisite:PSYC 834.  The seminar provides an advanced analysis of issues in the assessment and treatment of behaviour disorders in adulthood. Prototype cases are presented for illustrative discussion of particular clinical issues, e.g. indicators of risk for suicide, homicide, and psychosis; imagery and dreams in psychological treatment; stress-related physical disorders; anxiety-spectrum disorders; treatment for couples, families, and groups. Assessment and treatment approaches to particular disorders are compared with reference to etiological assumptions and levels of inference."
PSYC 836 "Advanced Clinical Seminar II: Child" "Prerequisite:PSYC 834.  The seminar provides an advanced analysis of issues in the assessment and treatment of behaviour disorders in children in a developmental context. Prototype cases are presented for illustrative discussion of particular clinical issues, e.g. stress-related physical disorders; family therapy; child abuse; age-related symptom expression and variability; non-verbal therapies."
PSYC 837 "Advanced Clinical Seminar II: General" "Prerequisite:PSYC 834.  This seminar is a blend of issues examined in PSYC 835 and 836 (see above)."
PSYC 838 "Extramural Practicum II: General" "Prerequisite:PSYC708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  This course is a senior extramural practicum, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the departments practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres."
PSYC 839 "Extramural Practicum II: Adult" "Prerequisite:PSYC708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  This course is a senior extramural practicum with adult clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the departments practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres."
PSYC 840 "Extramural Practicum II: Child" "Prerequisite:PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  This course is a senior extramural practicum with child clients done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the departments practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres."
PSYC 841 "Extramural Practicum III: General" "This course is a senior extramural practicum, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the departments practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres."
PSYC 842 "Extramural Practicum III: Adult" "This course is a senior extramural practicum with adult clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the departments practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres."
PSYC 843 "Extramural Practicum III: Child" "This course is a senior extramural practicum with child clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the departments practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres."
PSYC 844 "Clinical and Health Research Area Seminar II" "This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in clinical and health psychology to present and discuss their current research."
PSYC 845 "Cognitive Science Area Seminar II" "This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in cognitive science to present and discuss their current research."
PSYC 846 "Human Development Area Seminar II" "This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working on human development and developmental processes to present and discuss their current research."
PSYC 847 "Behavioural Neuroscience Area Seminar II" "This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in behavioural neuroscience to present and discuss their current research."
PSYC 850 "Practicum in ResearchTechniques" "Prerequisite:Permission of the PhD Program Director.  This practicum is designed to give students the opportunity to develop their research skills by such activities as learning new experimentaland technical approaches,developing instrumentsor computer programs to supportresearch, developing expertise in advanced statistical methods, or other equivalent activities."
PSYC 851 "Teaching ofResearch Techniques" "Prerequisite:Permission of PhD Program Director.  This practicum is designed to train students in the teaching ofresearchtechniques. Under supervision, the student is responsible for training an apprentice in specialized experimental skills orresearch techniques that may include advanced statistical methods,or other equivalent activities. Prior to beginning the work, students submit a detailed outline of the planned teaching activities tobe approved by the program director."
PSYC 880 "PhD Comprehensive Examination" "PSYC 885 Predoctoral Internship"
PSYC 890 "Research and Thesis" ""
PSYC 601 "Statistical Analysis and Experimental Design" "A detailed consideration of selected issues in Psychological statistics. Topics include parametric and non-parametric techniques, analysis of variance, power of statistical tests, and hypothesis testing."
PSYC 644 "Clinical and Health Research Area Seminar I " "A seminar in which current research of faculty and students in clinical and health psychology is presented and discussed."
PSYC 645 "Cognitive Science Area Seminar I " "A seminar in which current research of faculty and students in cognitive science is presented and discussed."
PSYC 646 "Human Development Area Seminar I " "A seminar in which current research of faculty and students in human development and developmental processes is presented and discussed."
PSYC 647 "Behavioural Neuroscience Area Seminar I " "A seminar in which current research of faculty and students in behavioural neuroscience is presented and discussed."
PSYC 690 "Research and Thesis" "PSYC 700 Psychopathology"
PSYC 714 "Central Topics in Psychology " "This general seminar deals with basic theoretical and research issues in Psychology. Topics are drawn from a wide range of areas in Psychology including perceptual and cognitive processes, learning, motivation, and psycho-pathology. Issues are considered with respect to developmental, physiological and social approaches. Students who have received credit for PSYC 602 may not take this course for credit."
PSYC 716 "Advanced Human Development" "This seminar on theory and research focuses on human development and developmental processes. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided that the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number."
PSYC 721 "Special Topics Seminar" "This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an integrative or selected area of psychology outside the departments major areas of specialization. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 722 "Focused Topic Seminar " "This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in a selected area of psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 724 "Special Topics in Clinical and Health Psychology" "This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of clinical and/or health psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 725 "Special Topics in Cognitive Science" "This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of cognitive science. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 726 "Special Topics in Human Development" "This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of human development and developmental processes. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 727 "Special Topics in Behavioural Neuroscience" "This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of behavioural neuroscience. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed."
PSYC 734 "Multivariate Statistics" "Prerequisite: PSYC 601.  Building upon material presented in PSYC 601, this course covers latent variable analyses and multivariate procedures, including factor analysis, structural equation modelling, multiple group models, and multilevel modelling."
POLI 801 "Advanced Seminar in Comparative Politics" "This course is a survey of the field of comparative politics at an advanced level. It examines major theories, concepts and methods of comparative political analysis."
POLI 802 "Advanced Seminar in International Politics" "This course is a survey of core concepts of international politics at an advanced level. It examines major theoretical perspectives and their application to historical and contemporary international issues."
POLI 803 "Advanced Seminar in Canadian and Qubec Politics" "This course is a survey of the field at an advanced level. It presents a discussion of contemporary issues and controversies in Canadian and Qubec politics."
POLI 804 "Advanced Seminar in Political Theory" "This course is a survey of leading research in political theory and political philosophy, including the history of political thought, normative political theory and contemporary political thought."
POLI 805 "Advanced Seminar in Public Policy and Public Administration" "This course surveys several theoretical models and paradigms of public policy and public administration. It examines critically the intellectual and ideological traditions of policy analysis."
POLI 844 "Research Design" "This course explores differing research philosophies, the principles of research design and research strategies. It also considers philosophical critiques of different approaches and practical aspects of conducting research."
POLI 811 "Special Topics in Comparative Politics" "Topics vary from year to year."
POLI 812 "Special Topics in International Politics" "Topics vary from year to year."
POLI 813 "Special Topics in Canadian and Qubec Politics" "Topics vary from year to year."
POLI 814 "Special Topics in Political Theory" "Topics vary from year to year."
POLI 815 "Special Topics in Public Policy and Public Administration" "Topics vary from year to year."
POLI 898 "Directed Studies" "Prerequisite:Permission of the PhD Committee. This special reading course is designed to explore topics and themes relevant to a students doctoral research."
POLI 885 "Comprehensive Exam" "POLI 886 Comprehensive Exam(6 credits)"
POLI 889 "Thesis Proposal" "POLI 890 Thesis(54 credits)"
PHIL 607 "Kant" "This course studies Kant and his work in its historical context, such as the Critique of Pure Reason or other texts of Kant."
PHIL 609 "Selected Topics in the History of Philosophy" "Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 609A, PHIL 609B, etc."
PHIL 612 "Ancient Philosophy" "This course studies the texts central to the development of ancient philosophical thought, such as works by Plato and Aristotle."
PHIL 613 "Medieval Philosophy" "This course analyzes and discusses texts central to the development of medieval philosophical thought, in the Arabic and Latin traditions. Works by Avicenna, Averroes, and Thomas Aquinas are studied."
PHIL 614 "Modern Philosophy" "This course studies central problems of 17th- and 18th-century European philosophy, from Bacon and Galileo at the beginning of the Scientific Revolution, through continental Rationalism (e.g., Descartes and Leibniz), to Hume and the legacy of British Empiricism."
PHIL 615 "19th-Century Philosophy" "This course studies the work of 19th-century philosophers in their historical context, such as Goethe, Schelling, Herder, and Hegel."
PHIL 616 "Selected Topics in the History and Philosophy of Science" "Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 616A, PHIL 616B, etc."
PHIL 617 "Origins of Analytic Philosophy" "This course provides an analysis of some of the central philosophical works in the analytic tradition from the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Works by central figures such as Frege, Russell, Wittgenstein or Carnap are covered."
PHIL 618 "Origins of Continental Philosophy" "Students study the sources of contemporary continental European thought in the 19th century and early 20th century, which are traced to German Idealism and Romanticism, Marxism, and early phenomenology. Authors studied may include Kant, Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, Marx, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, and Husserl."
PHIL 621 "Value Theory" "Students examine a topic in value theory, such as the exploration of different conceptions of well-being, the good, or of virtues."
PHIL 623 "Issues in Ethical Theory" "Students analyse central theories in normative ethics such as consequentialism, deontology, and contractualism; and in meta-ethnics such as realism, relativism, and moral nihilism."
PHIL 624 "Moral Problems" "Students investigate one or more approaches to difficult moral problems that confront us today, such as the need to find appropriate responses to war, revolution, tyranny, terrorism, global poverty, violence against women, and abortion."
PHIL 625 "Aesthetics" "This course examines central problems in the history of aesthetics and the philosophy of art, including the nature of beauty, the sublime, and the ontology of a work of art; or a study of a single text or author, such as Aristotles Poetics or Kants Critique of Judgment."
PHIL 626 "Political Philosophy" "This course investigates central theories in political philosophy, concerning distributive justice, the theory of just war, democracy, civil disobedience, freedom of speech, responsibilities to future generations, human rights, global justice, multiculturalism, liberalism, socialism, anarchism, or feminism."
PHIL 627 "Marx" "Students study central works by Karl Marx. The course may also address important interpretations of Marxs work, such as those developed by Analytic Marxists, Sartre, Althusser, Lukacs, or the Frankfurt School."
PHIL 628 "Philosophy of Law" "This course studies a central issue in philosophy of law, such as personality, property, rights, interpretation, responsibility, and punishment; or the jurisprudential perspective of such figures as Hart, Dworkin, Alexy, Luhmann, Weinrib, Waldron, Greenberg, Finnis, and Murphy."
PHIL 631 "Theories of Justice" "This course examines important philosophical contributions to debates about justice, such as distributive justice, political justice, human rights, global justice, and inter-generational justice."
PHIL 632 "Environmental Philosophy" "This course provides an analysis of the basic assumptions underlying one or more philosophical views of the natural world, such as ethical, aesthetic and ecofeminist theories as well as the theory of deep ecology."
PHIL 633 "Selected Topics in Value Theory" "Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 633A, PHIL 633B, etc."
PHIL 634 "Selected Topics in Epistemology" "Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 634A, PHIL 634B, etc."
PHIL 641 "Philosophical Foundations of Biology" "This course helps students critically engage biologys philosophical foundations. Topics typically include the nature of scientific reasoning, testing, and evidence in biology; how best to discover, define, and apply biological concepts; and how to structure the aims of biology to fit our diverse and changing societies."
PHIL 643 "Selected Topics in Metaphysics" "Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 643A, PHIL 643B, etc."
PHIL 644 "Philosophy of Science" "This course provides an analysis of philosophical issues raised by science, such as those concerning scientific evidence, concepts, theories, and explanation; or the intersection with ethical and social problems."
PHIL 645 "Philosophy of Mathematics" "This course investigates some of the central issues and theories in the philosophy of mathematics such as logicism, intuitionism, or formalism. Other topics may include the nature of mathematical truth or the ontology and epistemology of mathematics."
PHIL 646 "Philosophy of Language" "Students analyse some aspects of the philosophy of language, such as the nature of meaning, the relation between language and thought, or the relation between language and the world."
PHIL 647 "Philosophy of Mind" "Students investigate central issues in the philosophy of mind, such as the architecture and modularity of the mind, the mind-body problem and mental causation, or the metaphysics and function of consciousness."
PHIL 648 "Philosophy of Social Science" "Students study methods of various social and human sciences and the differences in aims between, for instance, understanding, explaining, experiencing, and being liberated from oppression."
PHIL 649 "Phenomenology" "Drawing from classical and recent phenomenlogical philosophy, students study selected central figures such as Husserl, Heidegger, and issues such as meaning, the body, temporality, and phenomenological reduction."
PHIL 652 "Selected Topics in Logic" "Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 652A, PHIL 652B, etc."
PHIL 656 "Selected Topics in Analytic Philosophy" "Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 656A, PHIL 656B, etc."
PHIL 658 "Selected Topics in Continental Philosophy" "Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 658A, PHIL 658B, etc."
PHIL 659 "Selected Topics in Metaphysics, Epistemology, or Philosophy of Science" "Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 659A, PHIL 659B, etc."
PHIL 672 "Tutorial " "PHIL 678 Topics in Current Research"
PHIL 693 "Research Paper " "PHIL 696 Thesis (27 credits)"
COMS 600 "Communication Theory " "This seminar studies and evaluates the major historical and contemporary approaches to communication theory. The following approaches are covered: Processes and Effects, Functionalism; Symbolism and Cultural Studies; Institutional Studies and Political Economy."
COMS 605 "Media Research Methods I" "Prerequisite: COMS 600 previously or concurrently.  This seminar prepares students to critique literature from any of the major research traditions; to make basic connections between epistemology and problems of basic communication research; to be able to identify the research method most appropriate to personal areas of interest; to design a basic research project."
COMS 606 "Media Research Practicum" "Prerequisite: COMS 605 and permission of the Graduate Program Director.  This course is an individual research practicum offered on a tutorial basis under faculty supervision. It may be used to develop advanced skills in a particular media research methodology. For students enrolled in theresearch-creation thesisorthesis options, this course is used to develop the analytic or creative research program necessary to accomplish the thesis."
COMS 608 "History of Media" "Prerequisite: COMS 600 previously or concurrently.  This seminar examines the development of communications technology and the media in a comparative and historical perspective. Topics include the transition from orality to literacy, the print revolution, the rise of new image technologies and the mass press in the nineteenth century, electronic media and the modern nation-state, global information, and the emergence of a world media system."
COMS 610 "Media Studies Seminar" "This full-year course meets monthly to introduce students to issues of professionalization, careers in Media Studies research and practice, applying for funding, publication and dissemination of research, and presentations of ongoing faculty research and research-creation. An annual December colloquium for the presentation of second-year thesis and research-creation work is held. Required for first-year students, and recommended for continuing students."
COMS 614 "News and Public Affairs" "This seminar examines the principles and discourses of news and public affairs media. The truth-value of news and public affairs programming is considered in the light of selectivity of reporting, changes in news formats, and the emergence of infotainment. Topics may include institutional structures, organizational routines, ideologies, and norms of representation that influence the construction of the news."
COMS 622 "Media Law" "This seminar examines legislation relevant to the creation and distribution of media products. Topics may include copyright, libel, freedom of expression and censorship, privacy and contracts."
COMS 624 "Media Management" "The course is designed to provide participants with a practical and theoretical understanding of such aspects of management in the media enterprise as: leadership styles; goal setting; strategic planning; labour relations; ethics; budget control; communications consulting; and effectiveness evaluation. During the course, participants examine various practices and problems in media management. The course begins with an analysis of management theory and relates to media institutions organizations. In addition, the program provides for advanced study of the social and cultural implications of communications and informations media, and of the analysis of the theory and professional practices of mass media institutions."
COMS 627 "Political Economy of Communication" "This seminar focuses on issues and problems related to media and cultural industries. Special attention is given to the production and distribution of cultural commodities. Topics for examination include the question of media ownership, the role of state agencies in media systems, and the economics of media institutions."
COMS 628 "Organizational Communication" "This seminar considers major approaches to organizational communication, particularly as they relate to media enterprises. Various paradigms are considered both as theoretical frames and as forms of social practice that have emerged in relation to shifting patterns of power, inequality, and technological change. Topics may include communication networks, organizational culture, the nature of bureaucracy, systematically distorted communication, gendered communication, the impact of new communication technologies, and patterns of organizational domination and resistance."
COMS 630 "Communication, Development, and Colonialism" "This seminar focuses on theoretical, and political issues related to interpersonal and mediated communication in developing areas. Topics may include: the forms of colonialism (neo- and post-) cultural domination, participatory development, women and minority constituency groups, sustainable development, and globalization."
COMS 632 "Media and Contemporary Culture" "This seminar investigates the influence of contemporary media systems on cultural values. Special attention is given to the question of consumption of popular culture and to recent developments in cultural theory. Topics may include: media constructions of nation and identity, media consumption patterns, political culture, popular and entertainment culture."
COMS 634 "International Communication" "This course explores the manner in which culture, ethnicity and other factors interact and are transformed through the international flow of information, images, and technologies. The international relationship between media, communication institutions, and constituency groups is considered. Topics may include: the analysis of genres and images, issues of cultural and media imperialism, the global information infrastructure; national sovereignty perspectives, and international broadcasting."
COMS 635 "Feminist Theory and Media" "This seminar examines concepts and principles from feminist theory in relation to the study of media and communication. Topics may include: theories of gender, sex and sexuality, psychoanalytic theory, materialist cultures, bodies and geographies, technologies, and visual cultures."
COMS 636 "Ethics and Media" "This seminar examines concepts and principles from ethical theory in relation to the study of media and communication. Possible topics include the ethical implications of media practices, the responsibility of media producers and audiences, the relationship of ethics to the pragmatics of communication, ethics and ethos, and the ethical implications of technology."
COMS 640 "Directed Study" "Students may enrol in a directed study under faculty supervision in order to undertake a specialized study of theoretical or research-related topics. Permission of the Graduate Program Director is required."
COMS 642 "Special Topics in Media Studies" "This seminar permits the in-depth examination of particular special topics in media and communication. Topics vary from year to year."
COMS 644 "Media Policy" "This seminar studies particular sectors of media policy and regulation in Canada. The policy sector under discussion may change from year to year and both historical and contemporary issues are examined. Topics may include: broadcasting, film, satellite and cable distribution, multiculturalism, northern and remote access, telecommunications, and the internet."
COMS 646 "Alternative Media" "This seminar explores various alternative and resistant practices to mainstream media, including community radio and television, artists and community video, independent film, underground/pirate media, the internet, and other emergent cultural forms. Topics may include: practices and theories of the alternative, methods of critical analysis, media monopolies, democracy and resistance, cultural imperialism, culture jamming, and the possibilities of new technology-based forms."
COMS 652 "The Canadian Documentary" "This course examines non-fiction film, television and other media in Canada. Materials considered may include the documentary work of the National Film Board, independent film and video, and television docu-drama. These are examined from a variety of perspectives such as history, form and textuality, institutional analysis, and culture."
COMS 656 "Forms and Genres in Communication" "This seminar examines specific patterns in cultural forms and texts. Attention is paid to the production, consumption, and textual attributes of genres. Topics vary from year to year, and may include a focus on advertising, public advocacy, documentary, popular music, situation comedy, or feminist feature film."
COMS 660 "Definitions and Futures of Media and Technology" "This seminar explores the social, cultural, and psychological aspects of media and technology. Media are considered as both containers and expressions of culture. In addition, this seminar focuses on the impacts of new technologies and media. Topics may include the interaction of media and culture, the role of technology in the development of human consciousness and values, and the future of media in the light of emergent technologies and practices."
COMS 662 "Theories of Representation and Interpretation in Communication" "This course examines discourse and media texts as forms of representation. Representation is considered in terms of both figure and argument. The course also presents theoretically-informed approaches to the interpretation and criticism of discourses and media texts. Possible theoretical approaches include rhetoric, semiotics, hermeneutics, and speech-act theory."
COMS 670 "Directed Study" "Students may enrol in a directed study under faculty supervision in order to undertake a specialized study of theoretical or research-related topics. Permission of the Graduate Program Director is required."
COMS 680 "Aesthetics and Media" "This seminar examines concepts and principles from aesthetic theory in relation to the study of media and communication. In addition to considering general aesthetic principles, the course may focus on particular aural or visual media. Topics may include the relationship of medium to aesthetic form, aesthetics and reception theory, aesthetics and ideology, the mass reproduction and distribution of aesthetic objects, and the aesthetics of new media."
COMS 684 "Media Research Laboratory" "This production-based seminar explores the intersections of analog, electronic and digital media with a special emphasis on their convergence. Topics may include digital imaging, multimedia information design and programming, three dimensional media, virtual reality, world-wide-web, hypertext and hypermedia publishing."
COMS 694 "Thesis/Research-Creation Thesis Proposal" "Prerequisite:COMS 600, 605, 610, plus 12 elective credits.  Under the direction of a supervisor, the thesis or research-creation thesis topic and research plan are put into a formal proposal and submitted to a proposal committee and the Graduate Program Director for approval. Proposals must be defended by the end of the third term for students to continue in either the Thesis or Research-Creation Thesis option."
COMS 695 "Thesis " "Prerequisite: COMS 694.  The thesis is researched and written in the Fall and Winter of the second year of study. It is submitted in written form and is between 20,000 and 25,000 words in length. The thesis format must be commensurate with Graduate Studies regulations and in a format stipulated by the rules of the Thesis Office.The thesis submission normally follows the graduate academic calendar dates.The thesis is defended in an oral examination."
COMS 697 "Research-CreationThesis" "Prerequisite:COMS 694.  Specifically designed for students with significant media production experience. During the Fall and Winter of the second year of study, students choosing Option III undertake a Research-CreationThesisthat deploys one or more media forms. The Research-CreationThesisis comprised of an original media production or prototype in any genre, and a 10,000 word document comprising a literature and media review, a theoretical and methodological contextualization, a critical reflection on theresearch-creationand its outcomes, and other areas of analysis as deemed necessary by the student and the studentsThesisCommittee.The thesis submission normally follows the graduate academic calendar dates. The thesis is defended in an oral examination."
MAST 830 "Cyclotomic Fields" "L-series, Dirichlet theorem, Gauss sums, Stickelberger theorem, class groups and class number, circular units, analytic formulae."
MAST 831 "Class Field Theory" "Local and global class field theory, ideles and adeles, reciprocity laws, existence theorem."
MAST 832 "Elliptic Curves" "Introduction to elliptic curves over finite fields, local and global fields, rational points, Mordell-Weil theorem, formal groups."
MAST 833 "Selected Topics in Number Theory" "MAST 834 Selected Topics in Computational Algebra(3 credits)"
MAST 837 "Selected Topics in Analysis" "MAST 838 Selected Topics in Pure Mathematics(3 credits)"
MAST 840 "Lie Groups" "The mathematical theory of Lie groups and introduction to their representation theory with applications to mathematical physics. Topics will include classical Lie groups, one-parameter subgroups, Lie algebras and the exponential mapping, adjoint and coadjoint representations, roots and weights, the Killing form, semi-direct products, Haar measure and decompositions such as those of Cartan and Iwasawa. The theory of unitary representations on Hilbert spaces. Physical applications of compact Lie groups (such as SU(2) and SU(3)) and non-compact groups (such as the Lorentz and Poincar groups)."
MAST 841 "Partial Differential Equations (P.D.E.s)" "Introduction to the mathematical theory of P.D.E.s, including applications to mathematical physics. Topics will include Sturm-Liouville systems, boundary value and eigenvalue problems, Greens functions for time-independent and time-dependent equations, Laplace and Fourier transform methods. Additional topics will be selected from the theory of elliptic equations (e.g. Laplace and Poisson equations), hyperbolic equations (e.g., the Cauchy problem for the wave equation) and parabolic equations (e.g., the Cauchy problem for the heat equation). Links will be made with the theory of differential operators and with analysis on manifolds."
MAST 851 "Differential Geometric Methods in Physics" "Manifolds, differential systems, Riemannian, Kahlerian and symplectic geometry, bundles, supermanifolds with applications to relativity, quantization, gauge field theory and Hamiltonian systems."
MAST 852 "Algebro-Geometric Methods in Physics" "Algebraic curves, Jacobi varieties, theta functions, moduli spaces of holomorphic bundles and algebraic curves, rational maps, sheaves and cohomology with applications to gauge theory, relativity and integrable systems."
MAST 853 "Gauge Theory and Relativity" "Yang-Mills theory, connections of fibre bundles, spinors, twistors, classical solutions, invariance groups, instantons, monopoles, topological invariants, Einstein equations, equations of motion, Kaluza-Klein, cosmological models, gravitational singularities."
MAST 854 "Quantization Methods" "Geometric quantization, Borel quantization, Mackey quantization, stochastic and phase space quantization, the problems of prequantization and polarization, deformation theory, dequantization."
MAST 855 "Spectral Geometry" "Schrdinger operators; min-max characterization of eigenvalues, geometry of the spectrum in parameter space, kinetic potentials, spectral approximation theory, linear combinations and smooth transformations of potentials, applications to the N-body problem."
MAST 856 "Selected Topics in Mathematical Physics" "MAST 857 Selected Topics in Differential Geometry(3 credits)"
MAST 860 "Differentiable Dynamical Systems" "The study of dynamical properties of diffeomorphisms or of one-parameter groups of diffeomorphisms (flows) defined on differentiable manifolds. Periodic points, the non-wandering set, and more general invariant sets. Smales horseshoe, Anosov, and Morse-Smale systems, general hyperbolic systems, the stable manifold theorem, various forms of stability, Markov partitions and symbolic dynamics."
MAST 861 "Absolutely Continuous Invariant Measures" "Review of functional analysis, Frobenius-Perron operator and its properties, existence of absolutely continuous invariant measures for piecewise expanding transformations, properties of invariant densities, compactness of invariant densities, spectral decomposition of the Frobenius-Perron operator, bounds on the number of absolutely continuous invariant measures, perturbations of absolutely continuous invariant measures."
MAST 862 "Numerical Analysis of Nonlinear Problems" "Continuation of solutions, homotopy methods, asymptotic stability, bifurcations, branch switching, limit points and higher order singularities, Hopf bifurcation, control of nonlinear phenomena, ODE with boundary and integral constraints, discretization, numerical stability and multiplicity, periodic solutions, Floquet multipliers, period doubling, tori, control of Hopf bifurcation and periodic solutions, travelling waves, rotations, bifurcation phenomena in partial differential equations, degenerate systems."
MAST 863 "Bifurcation Theory of Vector Fields" "Local and global bifurcations. Generalized Hopf bifurcation and generalized homoclinic bifurcation. Hamiltonian systems and systems close to Hamiltonian systems, local codimension two bifurcations of flows."
MAST 865 "Selected Topics in Dynamical Systems" "Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics"
MAST 871 "Advanced Probability Theory" "Definition of probability spaces, review of convergence concepts, conditioning and the Markov property, introduction to stochastic processes and martingales."
MAST 872 "Stochastic Processes" "Stochastic sequences, martingales and semi-martingales, Gaussian processes, processes with independent increments, Markov processes, limit theorems for stochastic processes."
MAST 873 "Advanced Statistical Inference" "Decision functions, randomization, optimal decision rules, the form of Bayes rule for estimation problems, admissibility and completeness, minimax, rules, invariant statistical decisions, admissible and minimax decision rules, uniformly most powerful tests, unbiased tests, locally best tests, general linear hypothesis, multiple decision problems."
MAST 874 "Advanced Multivariate Inference" "Wishart distribution, analysis of dispersion , tests of linear hypotheses, Raos test for additional information, test for dimensionality, principal component analysis, discriminant analysis, Mahalanobis distance, cluster analysis, relations with sets of variates."
MAST 875 "Advanced Sampling" "Unequal probability sampling, multistage sampling, super population models, Bayes and empirical Bayes estimation, estimation of variance from complex surveys, non-response errors and multivariate auxiliary information."
MAST 876 "Survival Analysis" "Failure time models, inference in parametric models, proportional hazards, non-parametric inference, multivariate failure time data, competing risks."
MAST 877 "Reliability Theory" "Reliability performance measures, unrepairable systems, repairable systems, load-strength reliability models, distributions with monotone failure rates, analysis of performance effectiveness, optimal redundancy, heuristic methods in reliability."
MAST 878 "Advanced Risk Theory" "Generalizations of the classical risk model, renewal processes, Cox processes, diffusion models, ruin theory and optimal surplus control."
MAST 881 "Selected Topics in Probability, Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics" "Seminars"
MAST 858 "Seminar in Mathematical Physics" "MAST 859 Seminar in Differential Geometry(3 credits)"
MAST 890 "Comprehensive Examination A" "MAST 891 Comprehensive Examination B(6 credits)"
MAST 651 "The Contributions of Mathematics to Intellectual Life" "This course examines several major mathematical advances over the centuries in the historical and intellectual contexts of the day and also focuses on the developments of a particular branch of mathematics over the more recent past. Examples may include recent advances in number theory and geometry leading to a proof of Fermats Last Theorem and applications of number theory to cryptography."
MAST 652 "Topics in Research in Mathematics Education" "The general aim of this course is to acquaint students with research problems inmathematics education and ways of approaching them (theoretical frameworks andresearch methodologies)."
MAST 653 "Topics in the Foundations of Mathematics" "This course focuses on foundational issues and developments in mathematics, with topics chosen from particular branches of mathematics, e.g., geometry (Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries; comparison of Euclids Elements with Hilberts Grundlagen der Geometrie, etc.), or logic (evolution of logic from Aristotle to Boole; Hilberts program; Gdels Incompleteness theorems, etc.). It may also look at foundational problems in mathematics suggested by physics and other sciences. More general, philosophical, epistemological and methodological questions about the nature of mathematics may also be chosen as topics for the course."
MAST 654 "Topics in the History of Mathematics" "This course may focus on a particular epoch and place in the history of mathematics (e.g., Ancient Greek, Indian and Chinese mathematics; the development of mathematics in Europe in the 17th to 19th centuries, etc.), or on the history of a particular area of mathematics (history of geometry, algebra, analysis, number theory, etc.). Aspects related to the history of approaches to teaching mathematics may also be addressed."
MAST 655 "Topology " "Topological spaces. Order, product, subspace, quotient topologies. Continuous functions. Compactness and connectedness. The fundamental group and covering spaces."
MAST 656 "Differential Geometry " "Mappings, functions and vectors fields on Rn, inverse and implicit function theorem, differentiable manifolds, immersions, submanifolds, Lie groups, transformation groups, tangent and cotangent bundles, vector fields, flows, Lie derivatives, Frobenius theorem, tensors, tensor fields, differential forms, exterior differential calculus, partitions of unity, integration on manifolds, Stokes theorem, Poincar lemma, introduction to symplectic geometry and Hamiltonian systems."
MAST 657 "Manifolds " "MAST 658 Lie Groups (3 credits)"
MAST 661 "Topics in Analysis " "MAST 662 Functional Analysis I (3 credits)"
MAST 663 "Introduction to Ergodic Theory " "This course covers the following topics: measurable transformations, functional analysis review, the Birkhoff Ergodic Theorem, the Mean Ergodic Theorem, recurrence, ergodicity, mixing, examples, entrophy, invariant measures and existence of invariant measures."
MAST 664 "Dynamical Systems " "An introduction to the range of dynamical behaviour exhibited by one-dimensional dynamical systems. Recurrence, hyperbolicity, chaotic behaviour, topological conjugacy, structural stability, and bifurcation theory for one-parameter families of transformation. The study of unimodal functions on the interval such as the family Fr (X) = rx (1-x), where 0  r  4 . For general continuous maps of the interval, the structure of the set of periodic orbits, for example, is found in the theorem of Sarkovskii."
MAST 665 "Complex Analysis " "Review of Cauchy-Riemann equations, holomorphic and meromorphic functions, Cauchy integral theorem, calculus of residues, Laurent series, elementary multiple-valued functions, periodic meromorphic functions, elliptic functions of Jacobi and Wierstrass, elliptic integrals, theta functions. Riemann surfaces, uniformization, algebraic curves, abelian integrals, the Abel map, Riemann theta functions, Abels theorem, Jacobi varieties, Jacobi inversion problem. Applications to differential equations."
MAST 666 "Differential Equations " "MAST 667 Reading Course in Analysis (3 credits)"
MAST 668 "Transform Calculus " "MAST 669 Measure Theory (3 credits)"
MAST 670 "Mathematical Methods in Statistics " "This course will discuss mathematical topics which may be used concurrently or subsequently in other statistics stream courses. The topics will come mainly from the following broad categories; 1) geometry of Euclidean space; 2) matrix theory and distribution of quadratic forms; 3) measure theory applications (Reimann-Stieltjes integrals); 4) complex variables (characteristic functions and inversion); 5) inequalities (Cauchy-Schwarz, Holder, Minkowski, etc.) and numerical techniques (Newton-Raphson algorithm, scoring method, statistical differentials); 6) some topics from probability theory."
MAST 671 "Probability Theory " "Axiomatic construction of probability; characteristic and generating functions; probabilistic models in reliability theory; laws of large numbers; infinitely divisible distributions; the asymptotic theory of extreme order statistics."
MAST 672 "Statistical Inference I " "Order statistics; estimation theory; properties of estimators; maximum likelihood method; Bayes estimation; sufficiency and completeness; interval estimation; shortest length confidence interval; Bayesian intervals; sequential estimation."
MAST 673 "Statistical Inference II " "Testing of hypotheses; Neyman-Pearson theory; optimal tests; linear hypotheses; invariance; sequential analysis."
MAST 674 "Multivariate Analysis " "An introduction to multivariate distributions will be provided; multivariate normal distribution and its properties will be investigated. Estimation and testing problems related with multivariate normal populations will be discussed with emphasis on Hotellings generalized T2 and Wishart distribution. Other multivariate techniques including MANOVA; canonical correlations and principal components may also be introduced."
MAST 675 "Sample Surveys " "A review of statistical techniques and simple random sampling, varying probability sampling, stratified sampling, cluster and systematic sampling-ratio and product estimators."
MAST 676 "Linear Models " "Matrix approach to development and prediction in linear models will be used. Statistical inferences on the parameters will be discussed after development of proper distribution theory. The concept of generalized inverse will be fully developed and analysis of variance models with fixed and mixed effects will be analyzed."
MAST 677 "Time Series " "Statistical analysis of time series in the time domain. Moving average and exponential smoothing methods to forecast seasonal and non-seasonal time series, construction of prediction intervals for future observations, Box-Jenkins ARIMA models and their applications to forecasting seasonal and non-seasonal time series. A substantial portion of the course will involve computer analysis of time series using computer packages (mainly MINITAB). No prior computer knowledge is required."
MAST 678 "Statistical Consulting and Data Analysis " "MAST 679 Topics in Statistics and Probability (3 credits)"
MAST 720 "Survival Analysis " "Parametric and non-parametric failure time models; proportional hazards; competing risks."
MAST 721 "Advanced Actuarial Mathematics " "General risk contingencies; advanced multiple life theory; population theory; funding methods and dynamic control."
MAST 722 "Advanced Pension Mathematics " "Valuation methods, gains and losses, stochastic returns, dynamic control."
MAST 723 "Portfolio Theory " "Asset and liability management models, optimal portfolio selection, stochastic returns, special topics."
MAST 724 "Risk Theory " "General risk models; renewal processes; Cox processes; surplus control."
MAST 725 "Credibility Theory " "Classical, regression and hierarchical Bayes models, empirical credibility, robust credibility, special topics."
MAST 726 "Loss Distributions " "Heavy tailed distributions, grouped/censured data, point and interval estimation, goodness-of-fit, model selection."
MAST 727 "Risk Classification " "Cluster analysis, principal components, discriminant analysis, Mahalanobis distance, special topics."
MAST 728 "Reading Course in Actuarial Mathematics " "MAST 729 Selected Topics in Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)"
MAST 680 "Topics in Applied Mathematics " "MAST 681 Optimization (3 credits)"
MAST 682 "Matrix Analysis " "Jordan canonical form and applications, Perron-Frobenius theory of nonnegative matrices with applications to economics and biology, generalizations to matrices which leave a cone invariant."
MAST 683 "Numerical Analysis " "This course consists of fundamental topics in numerical analysis with a bias towards analytical problems involving optimization integration, differential equations and Fourier transforms. The computer language C++ will be introduced and studied as part of this course; the use of functional programming and graphical techniques will be strongly encouraged. By the end of the course, students should have made a good start on the construction of a personal library of tools for exploring and solving mathematical problems numerically."
MAST 684 "Quantum Mechanics " "The aim of this course is two-fold: (i) to provide an elementary account of the theory of non-relativistic bound systems, and (ii) to give an introduction to some current research in this area, including spectral geometry."
MAST 685 "Approximation Theory " "MAST 686 Reading Course in Applied Mathematics (3 credits)"
MAST 687 "Control Theory " "Linear algebraic background material, linear differential and control systems, controllability and observability, properties of the attainable set, the maximal principle and time-optimal control."
MAST 688 "Stability Theory " "MAST 689 Variational Methods (3 credits)"
MAST 691 "Mathematical Logic " "MAST 692 Advanced Algebra I (3 credits)"
MAST 693 "Algebraic Number Theory " "Dedekind domains; ideal class groups; ramification; discriminant and different; Dirichlet unit theorem; decomposition of primes; local fields; cyclotomic fields."
MAST 694 "Group Theory " "Introduction to group theory, including the following topics: continuous and locally compact groups, subgroups and associated homogeneous spaces. Haar measures, quasi-invariant measures, group extensions and universal covering groups, unitary representations, Euclidean and Poincar groups, square integrability of group representations with applications to image processing."
MAST 696 "Advanced Algebra II " "MAST 697 Reading Course in Algebra (3 credits)"
MAST 698 "Category Theory " "MAST 699 Topics in Algebra (3 credits)"
RELI 6001 "Method and Theory in the Study of Religion" "This course provides students with an understanding of the major approaches to the academic study of religion. It introduces students to key theories of religion as a social and cultural phenomenon, as well as contemporary methodologies and the ways in which they colour, control, and reflect the representation of religious experience and expression. Students develop a critical theoretical orientation for their research and a familiarity with the skills that they apply in their coursework and final project."
RELI 6012 "Jewish Texts and Literature: Interpretation and Reception" "This course analyzes the sacred texts of Judaism and its interpretation through the ages. It enables students to comprehend the historical contexts and transitions of text as shifts and adjustments prevail. Topics may also include contemporary literature and popular transmissions of foundational texts into the present."
RELI 6013 "Canadian Jewish Studies" "This course covers the history, literature and ethnography of Canada's Jews. Exploring both the experiences and expressions of Canadian Jewry, the course examines lived religion and scarcely explored communal documents. Students are exposed to a variety of methodological approaches, such as literary criticism, ethnography and historiography."
RELI 6014 "Jewish Philosophy and Ethics" "This course examines Jewish philosophy in various historical periods. Topics may include ethics, metaphysics, cosmology, Jewish thought post-Holocaust, and reflections on the State of Israel. The course may focus on select Jewish thinkers or particular philosophical corpora."
RELI 6015 "Material and Popular Culture in Judaism" "This course explores the study of Jewish history and communities through material and popular culture. Topics may include the production and use of objects, images, ornament, iconography, epigraphy, and sacred space, art, film, and music. It considers how attention to material and popular culture allows for a nuanced understanding of the complexity and variety of Jewish cultures."
RELI 6017 "Jewish Communities in Historical and Regional Contexts" "This course examines Jewish communities in particular historical and cultural regions, notably the Middle East and Israel, North America, and Eastern Europe. It emphasizes how Jewish communities have interacted with outsiders, constructed intercommunal boundaries, responded to patterns of migration and immigration, and been shaped by changing social and political circumstances in these particular locations."
RELI 6018 "Jewish Community Engagement" "Prerequisite:Permission of the Graduate Program Director."
JOUR 500 "Critical Approaches to Journalism" "This course introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. By interrogating specific readings, students are encouraged to consider the journalist as a cultural producer operating within overlapping social, political and economic contexts."
JOUR 502 "Introduction to Reporting" "This is a comprehensive lecture/laboratory course which lays the foundations for the writing and reporting demands of journalism. Students are introduced to the salient features of print and digitalformats, and receive assignments in information-gathering and writing both in class and in the field."
JOUR 504 "IntermediateReporting " "Prerequisite: JOUR 502.  Thiscourse is intended to consolidate thereporting andwriting skills learned during the summer. Through lectures and laboratory work, studentsexpand their knowledgeof information-gathering and writing techniques, including short deadline news reporting and feature writing."
JOUR 505 "Advanced Reporting" "This workshop offers students the opportunity to perfect theirreporting and writing skills and to undertake long form writingprojects,ranging from beat reporting to magazine writing."
JOUR 508 "Research Project" "The project is to be a comprehensive study and report on some area of modern media practice, or on the interaction of media and society. The subject and method must be approved in advance by the instructor of the course."
JOUR 511 "Introduction to Multimedia" "Thiscourse is an introduction to theuse of technology across audio andvisual newsplatforms, including audio, visual and digital equipment and software. Students learn the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories."
JOUR 513 "Journalism Ethics and the Law" "This course examines the journalists responsibility in terms of both ethics and the law. It introduces students to a representative cross-section of ethical theories and codes and takes an intensive look at the most common legal issues affecting the practice of journalism."
JOUR 528 "The DigitalMagazine" "Thiscourserequiresstudents toproduce the Departments Digital Magazine.The course replicates the working conditions and journalistic experience of a digital newsroom. Students are expected to work in editorial teams to create current and update multimedia content throughout the term."
JOUR 530 "Advanced Radio News" "This is a workshop course in which students function as reporters, writers, news readers and editors in order to learn the skills necessary to produce daily newscasts."
JOUR 532 "Documentary Video and Radio" "Thisworkshop allows students to perfect their skills in long format public affairs broadcasting insound and pictures. Students learn the fundamentals of documentary production including story developments and treatment,cinematographicstyle, interviewing, editing and presentation."
JOUR 542 "International Journalism " "This course examines the way journalism is practiced in a selected country or tradition. The focus of the course may change from year to year."
JOUR 566 "Photojournalism" "Using digital cameras and technology, students perform a variety of exercises and assignments to help them master the techniques used in planning, taking, and laying out news photographs."
ADIP 500 "Adult Education in Qubec as a Field of Study" "ADIP 501 Philosophical Issues in Educational Research"
ADIP 585 "Integrative Internship I " "Prerequisite: Students must have completed at least 15 credits in their program of study, including ADIP 500 Adult Education in Quebec as a Field of Study. This course is associated with, and normally represents, a prerequisite for Integrative Internship II.  Integrative Internship I is designed to allow students to build on their acquired knowledge, skills, values and attitudes through interaction with a chosen education environment. The first Internship requires students to select, contact and establish a working relation with an organization which offers educational activities to adults in their community. A supervised Special Project for an adult education provider is initiated. At this stage, the emphasis is on observation and information gathering, in preparation for taking on a more active role in Integrative Internship II."
ADIP 586 "Integrative Internship II" "Prerequisite: ADIP 585.  This internship is designed to extend the students personal aims and philosophy of adult education arrived at in Integrative Internship I by completing a supervised Special Project in an approved adult education facility, where supervision is provided by a member of a host institution in consultation with the professor."
ADIP 593 "Practicum I " "Prerequisite: At least 18 credits in the Diploma in Adult Education Teacher Certification Option II.  This course is designed for students who possess a Provincial Teaching Authorization or are currently working in adult education in the Quebec school system. Students enroling in this practicum are expected to have completed courses in theoretical and conceptual content in the field of adult education. This practicum provides an opportunity in which they can apply this knowledge to their classroom teaching experience."
ADIP 594 "Practicum II" "Prerequisite: ADIP 593.  This course is designed for students who possess a Provisional Teaching Authorization or are currently working in adult education in the Quebec school system. Satisfactory classroom performance in the students subject matter specialty is judged on the basis of reports from the school principal, mentors chosen from the teaching staff, and a supervisor from the University."
ADIP 597 "Adult Education I - Selected Topics " "Cross-listed: ESTU 676."
ADIP 598 "Adult Education II" "Cross-listed: ESTU 677."
CHEM 610 "Selected Topics in Analytical Chemistry" "This course explores themes within the area of Analytical Chemistry."
CHEM 612 "Analytical Separations" "Prerequisite: CHEM 218, 312, or equivalent.  High performance liquid separations on an analytical (non-preparative) scale are surveyed. Fundamental separation mechanisms and application of the techniques are discussed. Emphasis is placed on separations of biologically relevant analytes which include peptides, proteins and nucleic acids. Lectures only."
CHEM 614 "Modern Aspects of Practical Mass Spectrometry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 494 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.  Theoretical and operational aspects of modern mass spectrometry are discussed in a number of formal lectures and training sessions. All students must carry out an independent mass spectrometry project on their molecules of choice. Projects can be selected from all areas of chemistry, biochemistry or biology including the omics sciences (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics)."
CHEM 620 "Selected Topics in Organic Chemistry" "This course explores themes within the area of Organic Chemistry."
CHEM 621 "Physical Organic Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235; CHEM 324 or 325; or equivalent."
CHEM 623 "Organic Synthesis" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235, 324, or equivalent.  This course is concerned with synthetic strategy and design. It provides an introduction to advanced synthetic methods and reagents, involving heteroatoms such as sulphur, phosphorus, tin and selenium, as well as an overview of the uses of protecting groups in organic chemistry. The concept of retrosynthesis and a few asymmetric reactions are discussed using syntheses of natural products from the literature as examples. Lectures only."
CHEM 625 "Nucleic Acid Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 221, 222, 271, or equivalent.  This course introduces students to various topics in nucleic acid chemistry. The topics include nomenclature, structure and function of RNA and DNA; techniques and methods to investigate nucleic acid structure; DNA damage and repair; interaction of small molecules and proteins with nucleic acid; oligonucleotide-based therapeutics (antisense, antigene, RNAi); synthesis of purines, pyrimidines and nucleosides; and solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis. Lectures only."
CHEM 626 "Reactive Intermediates" "Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 325, or equivalent.  This course offers an introduction to reactive intermediates with an emphasis on structure and stability as found in modern (physical) organic chemistry. While the focus is on radicals and carbenes, carbocations are discussed near the end of the term. The material covered is relevant to chemistry and biochemistry. Lectures only."
CHEM 627 "Supramolecular Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 324 or 325; CHEM 335; or equivalent; or permission of the Department.  This course reviews some fundamental aspects of synthetic and biological supramolecular chemistry and nanotechnology. Topics covered may include supramolecular forces, ion binding and ion channels, molecular recognition, self-assembly (meso-scale and molecular-scale), organometallic supramolecular chemistry, dynamic combinatorial chemistry (DCC), and foldamers. Lectures only."
CHEM 630 "Selected Topics in Physical Chemistry" "This course explores themes within the area of Physical Chemistry."
CHEM 631 "Computational Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 241, 333, or equivalent; or permission of the Department.  This course presents the concepts, tools, and techniques of modern computational chemistry, and provides a very broad overview of the various fields of application across chemistry and biochemistry. The course is divided into two parts: 1) Molecular structure, which covers molecular mechanics and elementary electronic structure theory of atoms and molecules; and 2) Chemical reactivity, which covers applications of quantum chemistry and molecular dynamics techniques to studies of chemical reactions. The applications discussed include organic molecules and their reactions, peptides and proteins, drug design, DNA, polymers, inorganics, and materials. The course includes a practical component where students acquire hands-on experience with commonly used computational chemistry computer software. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 632 "Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234 or equivalent.  In this course, the basic concepts of classical (equilibrium) thermodynamics are first reviewed, followed by an introduction to statistical thermodynamics which gives a unified method of treating transport processes. At this point, the Boltzmann distribution function is derived, which leads to the statistical interpretation of entropy. Other important thermodynamic functions such as the partition function, the partition function for large ensembles and the Sackur-Tetrode equation are examined. The course also addresses non-equilibrium thermodynamics in the linear domain. The relations describing the production of entropy in irreversible processes due to heat transfer, charge transfer, change of volume, and chemical reactions are examined. The establishment of flux equations and the use of the Onsager reciprocal relations are then applied to the description of a variety of open systems. Lectures only."
CHEM 633 "Quantum Mechanics in Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 333, 431/631, or equivalent.  This course includes a thorough review of basic quantum mechanics in both the Schroedinger and Heisenberg representations, electronic structure theory, symmetry and group theory, interaction of matter with light, quantum scattering, the path integral formalism, quantum theories of chemical reaction rates, time-dependent approaches to spectroscopy, wave packet propagation, correlation functions and dynamics processes, and density matrices. Lectures only."
CHEM 635 "Interfacial Phenomena" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.  This course examines the physical chemistry of interfaces including surface and interfacial tensions, the absorption of surface active substances/surface excess properties, and surfactant self-assembly. Topics covered may include Gibbs and Langmuir monolayers, micelle formation, emulsions, foams, surfactant liquid crystals, layer-by-layer polymer self-assembly, and biological membranes. Techniques for characterization and applications (biological and industrial) of these systems are addressed. Lectures only."
CHEM 638 "Physics and Chemistry of Solid State Electronic Materials" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 333, or equivalent.  This course essentially explores how electrical conductivity is influenced by the nature of the chemical bonding in these solid-state materials. The course provides an introduction to solid-state structures and then goes on to explore band theory, the central model used to describe electrical conductivity in the following three categories of electronic materials: conductors, semiconductors, and insulators. Finally the course explores the extension of the band model to interpret electrical conductivity in molecular semiconductors and charge-transfer complexes. Lectures only."
CHEM 640 "Selected Topics in Inorganic Chemistry" "This course explores themes within the area of Inorganic Chemistry."
CHEM 643 "Organometallic Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 341, or equivalent.  This course covers the structure and properties of organometallic compounds, their main reactions and their application in catalysis and organic chemistry. Lectures only."
CHEM 644 "Physical Methods in Chemistry" "This course provides an in-depth evaluation of the different methods used in modern physical chemistry such as laser, microwave, FT-IR, electron spin resonance, nuclear magnetic resonance, x-ray photoelectron, x-ray diffraction and fluorescence, Auger eletron, Mssbauer, and gamma-ray spectroscopic analysis, as well as scanning probe microscopy and mass spectrometry. Lectures only."
CHEM 645 "Bioinorganic Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 241, 271, or equivalent.  Role of metals in biochemical systems. Essential trace elements, zinc enzymes, oxygen transport and storage, metalloproteins and biological electron transfer, structure-function relationships in heme enzymes, nitrogen fixation; model compounds for metalloproteins and metalloenzymes. Lectures only."
CHEM 646 "Industrial Catalysis" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.  Basic and recent concepts in catalysis are described with particular emphasis on heterogenous catalysis. The technical, economic and environmental aspects of industrial catalysis are covered. The processes to be studied are chosen from the petroleum industry, the natural gas and coal processing industry, and the production of thermoplastics and synthetic fibres. The course ends with a rapid survey of problems associated with the treatment of industrial pollutants and with catalytic converters. Lectures only."
CHEM 650 "Selected Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry" "This course explores themes within the area of Multidisciplinary Chemistry."
CHEM 651 "Nanochemistry" "Prerequisites: CHEM 217, 218, 221, 222, 234, 235, 241, or equivalent."
CHEM 658 "Aquatic Biogeochemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 217, 218, 312, or equivalent.  The major aim of this course is to present a quantitative treatment of the variables that determine the composition of natural waters. Chemical equilibrium is the central theme of the course, but consideration is also given to kinetics, steady-state and dynamic models. Related themes include global chemical cycles, air and water pollution, as well as current research topics in water chemistry and chemical oceanography. Lectures only."
CHEM 670 "Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics" "This course explores themes within the area of Biochemistry and Biophysics."
CHEM 676 "Structure and Function of Biomembranes" "Prerequisite: BIOL 266, CHEM 375, or equivalent.  Examples from the current literature are used to discuss what is known about how the membranes of biological organisms are assembled and the roles that these membranes play in a number of important processes. Emphasis is placed on the transport of proteins to and through biomembranes and the roles that membranes play in metabolite and ion transport. Where applicable, the significance of these processes is illustrated by examining the roles of membranes in health and disease. Lectures only."
CHEM 677 "Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism" "Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.  This course explores steady-state kinetics, including such topics as the use of initial velocity studies and product inhibition to establish a kinetic mechanism; nonsteady-state kinetics, isotope effects, energy of activation, and the detailed mechanisms of selected enzymes. Lectures only."
CHEM 678 "Protein Engineering and Design" "Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.  This course examines the principles behind protein design, how techniques of protein engineering are used, and the methods used to assess protein properties. Examples include studies of protein stability, structure-function relationships, and applications to drug design. Lectures only."
CHEM 690 "Selected Topics in Instrumentation" "This course explores themes within the area of Instrumentation."
CHEM 691 "Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 393, or equivalent.  This course is designed to provide the background in magnetic resonance theory necessary to understand modern high-resolution NMR experiments and instrumentation. The basic theory in the introductory section also applies to electron spin resonance (ESR). Relaxation and through-bond and through-space interactions, and experiments to investigate them are considered. Spin manipulations and behaviour in multiple-pulse, Fourier transform NMR techniques used for common spectral editing and two-dimensional experiments are discussed. Lectures only."
CHEM 692 "Experimental Protein Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 477 or equivalent or permission of the Department.  This hands on course introduces students to the common techniques used to study the structure and function of proteins and other macromolecules. Techniques covered include circular dichroism spectroscopy, fluorescence, UV/Vis spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, isothermal titration microcalorimetry, analytical ultracentrifugation, and protein crystallization/X-ray crystallography. The course includes theory, applications of the technique to the study of protein structure and function, and basic practice experiments to become familiar with the instrument and data analysis. For some of the techniques covered hands-on use will be limited. Each student is required to carry out a project on his/her own protein of interest. Each participant asks a specific question about a protein and then uses the techniques covered in the course to address the question. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 655 "Masters Research and Thesis " "CHEM 666 MSc Seminar (3 credits)"
BIOL 801 "Pedagogical training" "Candidates are required to give four lectures (normally 75 minutes each) to undergraduate classes. Two lectures are in introductory level courses and two in advanced undergraduate courses. Tutorials are provided to introduce students to teaching methods. The course is marked on a pass/fail basis. "
BIOL 802 "Research seminar" "Students are required to give one seminar to the Department based upon their research project. Normally the seminar is given in the second or third years of residency. Seminars are graded on a standard scale (A+ to F). The grade is based upon the presentation, content, and the students ability to answer questions. The grade is assigned by the Graduate Program Director in consultation with the candidates supervisory committee and other faculty members present at the seminar."
BIOL 850 "Research proposal and qualifying exam" "The student prepares a written research proposal based upon the research topic chosen for thesis research. The proposal is prepared in consultation with the supervisory committee and contains a literature review, a progress report and a detailed description of future experiments. The proposal should demonstrate a good understanding of the background of the project, the questions to be answered, and the experimental approaches needed to answer these questions. Both the written proposal and an oral summary of the proposal are presented to the examining committee within one year of entry into the PhD program."
BIOL 890 "Research and thesis" ""
BIOL 601 "Readings in Ecology and Behaviour I" "BIOL 602 Readings in Cell and Molecular Biology I"
CHEM 670 "Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics" "CHEM 671 Structure and Function of Biomembranes"
BIOL 616 "Current Advances in Ecological Research" "This course is given in alternate years and reviews selected areas of current research in ecology, evolution and behaviour through critical analysis of recent publications. Topics vary from year to year, and are determined in part by the interests of the students. Material covered may include papers published in refereed journals, monographs or books on specialized topics, or new textbooks covering advanced topics in a relevant area. Students are responsible for giving class presentations of selected material, leading class discussions, and submitting critiques and answers to assigned essay questions. Grading is based upon class participation, oral presentations and written work. Lectures only. (No laboratory component)."
BIOL 622 "Advanced Techniques in Ecology *" "This course introduces students to a variety of techniques of experimental design, data collection, and quantitative analysis. Students participate in a series of modules, each of which presents experimental and analytical techniques appropriate for one area of modern research in ecology, behaviour, or evolution. Some modules require students to collect and subsequently analyze original data from field or laboratory settings. Modules and their contents may vary from year to year. Tutorials and laboratory."
BIOL 623 "Advanced Applied Ecology and Conservation *" "This course applies principles of ecology at the individual, population, community and ecosystem level to identify and solve practical environmental problems. Topics include pollution, climate change, and farming, harvesting renewable resources, designing nature reserves and conserving bio-diversity. Lectures and tutorials."
BIOL 624 "Advances in Decomposer Communities and Nutrient Cycling *" "This course examines the role of the microbial community in the fundamental processes of decomposition and nutrient cycling. We discuss the role of microbes in the breakdown of organic molecules and the release and transformation of mineral elements. Emphasis is placed on the interactions between decomposition and on the interactions between bacteria, fungi, and the microbes in the maintenance of nutrient cycles. Lectures and laboratory."
BIOL 633 "Advanced Immunology *" "The role of the immune system in maintenance of body homeostasis will be presented with particular reference to cells and tissues of the immune system, their organization as well as their structural and functional relationships. Topics include: maturation and differentiation of B and T lymphocytes; structure and properties of antibodies; immune responses to antigens; genetic aspects of antibody synthesis; immunological considerations in AIDS, cancer, and autoimmune diseases. Lectures and seminars."
BIOL 634 "Advanced Cell Biology *" "Lectures dealing with selected topics in mammalian cell biology. These include introduction to the elements of cell biology. Introduction to the elements of cell culture with reference to the growth and function of non-differentiated and differentiated cells. Control of cell cycling under normal and abnormal states, mechanisms of peptide and steroid hormone action with emphasis on intracellular signaling pathways. The control of gene transcription and detailed analysis of the effect of host cell factors on virus replication. Lectures only."
BIOL 660 "Advanced Plant Biochemistry *" "Biochemical study of the natural constituents and secondary metabolites unique to plants. Their biosynthesis, biotransformations, and functions in plants, as well as their economic and pharmacologic importance are stressed. Lectures only."
BIOL 661 "Advanced Tissue Culture *" "This course looks at plant-growth regulators, nutritional requirements, and other factors necessary for in-vitro culturing of plant cells and tissues. The course also discusses methods available for nuclear transfers and the propagation of transformed plants. Lectures only."
BIOL 670 "Scientific Communication" "This course is offered every other year and is open to all graduate students in Biology or by special permission from the instructor. It is designed to present the requirements for publishable scientific writing, successful research proposals and the presentation of oral papers at scientific meetings. The course emphasizes good writing habits, focuses on the importance of thought, the conciseness of statements and clarity of exposition. The course combines lectures, group discussions, workshops and oral presentations. Marks are based on a number of written assignments, oral presentations as well as participation in class."
BIOL 671 "Scanning Electron Microscopy *" "This course is given alternate years in the Summer session and explains both the theory and practice of instrumentation and methodology. Students learn to operate the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and ancillary equipment such as sputter-coater and the critical point drier. Hands-on learning experience is stressed to acquire familiarity with special techniques. Instructions cover three aspects: instrumentation, specimen preparation (fixation and drying), and specimen mounting and coating. Tutorials and laboratory."
BIOL 687 "Advanced Molecular Genetics *" "This course concentrates on basic microbial and molecular genetics, introducing isolation and characterization of mutants, methods of mapping mutants, transposons, episomes, and recombinant DNA techniques. Lectures and conferences."
BIOL 688 "Advances in Biological Regulatory Mechanisms *" "This course examines the molecular basis of the control of metabolic pathways with an emphasis on procaryote systems. The course concentrates on the analysis of the rationale of experimentation used to elucidate these regulatory mechanisms. Lectures and conferences."
BIOL 689 "Advanced Techniques in Molecular Biology *" "Theory and practice of modern experimental procedures of molecular biology, including use of restriction enzymes, gene cloning, and hybridizations, DNA sequencing, site-directed mutagenesis, and the use of bacteria and phage in biotechnology. Laboratory and tutorials."
BIO 690 "Advanced Gene Structure *" "This course deals with gene regulation in eukaryotes. Topics covered include transcription, transcript processing, translation, and post-translational processes. Lectures only."
APLI 604 "Applied Language Studies" "This course examines the different theoretical concepts and methods used to analyze and describe the linguistic structure of language, and explores ways in which these can be applied to the teaching of second languages. The course introduces students to the key concepts that characterize the different components of language, namely phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics, within an approach that recognizes that languages can be affected by the social, psychological, and pragmatic aspects of human behaviour."
APLI 621 "Issues in Second Language Acquisition" "Research in second language acquisition (SLA) is surveyed in this course. Students read, critique, and discuss a number of research reports and survey articles on topics including research techniques in SLA, individual differences believed to affect success in second language learning (e.g., age, motivation), the systematicity of learner language (interlanguage, developmental sequences), the influence of learners first language on the structure of their interlanguage, the development of general theories of SLA. The course concludes with a discussion of SLA research carried out in classroom settings."
APLI 660 "Research Methods I" "The principal aims of the course are to enable students better to evaluate reports of empirical research in the language sciences and to plan limited studies of their own. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of research designs, the nature of scientific proof, and the assumptions underlying data analytic procedures. Case studies of published research, readings and lectures illustrate the concepts of data, scales, models, sampling, theory, description, estimation and significance testing."
APLI 623 "Sociolinguistic Aspects of Bilingualism and Multilingualism" "This course is an introduction to educational and sociolinguistic issues affecting the promotion and maintenance of individual and societal bilingualism, multilingualism, and multiculturalism. The societal consequences of being multilingual and multicultural and the perspectives of both students and educators in multilingual/multicultural language classrooms will be examined."
APLI 624 "Psycholinguistic Aspects of Second Language Acquisition" "Prerequisite: APLI 660 (previously or concurrently).  This course examines issues in second language acquisition and bilingualism/multilingualism from a cognitive (psycholinguistic) perspective. The aim of the course is to familiarize students with basic psycholinguistic concepts of language representation and use, focusing on the learning of different aspects of language, the role of attention and memory in language acquisition, the development of language comprehension and production skills, and the cognitive consequences of bilingualism/multilingualism. Throughout the course, emphasis is given to understanding research methodologies used in psycholinguistic investigations."
APLI 626 "Variationist Second Language Acquisition" "The acquisition of a second language is a process that is inherently variable due to factors such as the influence of the learners first language, the target language, extralinguistic variables, and other factors. This course examines the interplay of these variables, focusing on current research in variable second language acquisition and on the pedagogical implications and applications of this knowledge for second language teaching."
APLI 627 "Individual Differences in Second Language Acquisition" "The course provides an overview of learners individual differences in cognitive, social, affective, and motivational variables and the role of those differences in second language teaching and learning. Course topics may include language aptitude, motivation, learning and cognitive styles, personality, and language learning strategies. The course offers a research-based framework for understanding how individual differences impact language learning for different learners in various learning contexts."
APLI 634 "Cross-Linguistic Influence" "Prerequisite: APLI 604.  This course provides an overview of different perspectives that have been taken on the ways previously learned languages affect the learning of subsequent languages. Topics include: the contrastive analysis and error analysis approaches; avoidance; markedness; selective, bidirectional, and conceptual transfer; and factors affecting cross-linguistic influence among trilingual and multilingual speakers. Throughout the course, the implications for language teaching of the theoretical perspectives and empirical findings are considered."
APLI 601 "Phonological Aspects of Second Language Acquisition" "Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).  This course is an introduction to second language phonology, with emphasis on how theoretical knowledge and research can be applied to the teaching of pronunciation in traditional and computer-based environments. This course familiarizes students with the English sound system and associated phonetic phenomena, research in the development of second language phonology, and key concepts in phonemic representation, production and perception."
APLI 610 "Teaching and Learning Second Language Vocabulary" "Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).  The course provides an overview of research perspectives on second language vocabulary acquisition. Topics include the characteristics of lexis, the structure of the mental lexicon, implicit and explicit learning, and issues in assessment. The course also outlines a research-informed approach to instruction: in addition to examining both old and new techniques for teaching vocabulary, it explores developments in corpus linguistics that are relevant to vocabulary instruction and materials design."
APLI 616 "Pedagogical Grammar" "Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).  This course surveys the theoretical and empirical literature related to the teaching and learning of grammar in second language classrooms. Topics include the nature of pedagogical rules, the use of metalinguistic terminology, teachers knowledge and beliefs, learner characteristics, task types, and sequencing. Students also study a grammar structure in depth for which they subsequently develop, pilot, and critically evaluate a set of instructional materials."
APLI 636 "Language Awareness" "This course focuses on current research and practice in language awareness relating to language teaching and learning for a variety of learners in different contexts. Topics may include the learning of first, second and additional languages, language teaching methodology, language teacher education, attitudes towards language, cross-linguistic and cross-cultural awareness, and critical language awareness. Throughout the course, emphasis is placed on both the theoretical and practical implications of language awareness."
APLI 643 "Pragmatics and Second Language Acquisition" "The course provides an overview of pragmatics, which includes topics ranging from reference, implicature, presupposition, speech acts, information structure, and conversational structure. The course also provides a research-informed approach to the study of these topics in second language learning contexts, exploring developments in second language research that are relevant to the understanding of pragmatics."
APLI 630 "Second Language Syllabus Design and Curriculum Planning" "The aims of the course are to examine the evolution of the syllabus in second language teaching and to consider issues related to the development, planning and implementation of language programs in a range of educational settings. Topics include the history of second language teaching; current issues in pedagogical practice; assessment of student needs; and the design, sequencing, and evaluation of language teaching materials."
APLI 635 "Language Assessment" "The course provides an overview of theory and research that informs language testing. Students explore historical developments in language assessment as well as current trends. The course enables them to critically evaluate a range of test types including standardized placement instruments, diagnostic tests, progress/achievement measures, and non-traditional assessment techniques. Students are guided in designing sample tests; they are also familiarized with established methods for analyzing test items and interpreting results."
APLI 644 "Technology in Language Learning" "This course explores theoretical and applied issues related to the use of technology in second language learning and teaching. The principal aims of the course are to enable students to critically evaluate existing instructional uses of technology and to design methodologically sound technology-based materials for second language teaching. Emphasis is placed on developing skills needed for the integration of instructional technology into second language instruction."
APLI 646 "Literacy" "This course examines the development of reading and writing abilities in a second language, including the connections between the two. It discusses literacy issues pertaining to different age groups and proficiency levels, including university students acquiring advanced academic writing skills. Throughout the course, the implications for language teaching of the different theoretical and empirical findings will be considered."
APLI 647 "Supervision of Practice Teaching" "This course is designed for students who have some ESL teaching experience and a particular interest in working in the field of teacher training. The course has both a practical and a theoretical component. In the practical component, students observe and assist novice ESL teachers; in the theoretical component, students meet weekly in an academic seminar."
APLI 641 "Research Methods II" "Prerequisite: APLI 660.  Theprincipal aims of the course are to enable students to evaluate the statistical information provided in reports of empirical research in the social sciences and use statistics in small scale studies. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of statistical tests, the assumptions underlying their use, and the interpretation of the results. The course also includes basic elements of data analysis and synthesis in research employing qualitative methodologies."
APLI 651 "Special Topics in Applied Linguistics" "This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized literature in an area of Applied Linguistics."
APLI 671 "Reading Course in Applied Linguistics I" "APLI 672 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics II"
APLI 690 "Thesis Proposal" "APLI 691 Thesis (18 credits)"
HENV 801 "Pedagogical Training" "The objective of this course is to ensure that all PhD students acquire strong teaching and other communication skills which are useful for both academic and non-academic positions. Candidates are required to attend a seminar in university teaching in collaboration with the Centre for Teaching and Learning Services of Concordia University. Following the successful completion of this seminar, candidates are required to give four lectures (normally 75 minutes each) to undergraduate classes. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis."
HENV 802 "Experiential Learning " "The objective of this course is to ensure that all students acquire some practical experience in their field of research. Candidates are required to work for a minimum of 200 hours (either full-time or part-time) in either the private sector in a field relevant to their doctoral research, in a research laboratory based outside Concordia University, in a non-profit organization or in the government. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis."
HENV 805 "Research Proposal Seminar " "Conceptual and methodological frameworks related to human interventions in the environment in the built, social and natural environment are examined through various student presentations and exchanges on their research topic. This course includes completion of the oral presentation of the research proposal."
HENV 810 "Thesis Proposal" "Students are required to select their research topic and formulate a thesis proposal under the supervision of a thesis supervisor and with input from a supervisory committee. The written proposal includes a sound rationale for the proposed research, a detailed description of the research design and methodology, and a comprehensive literature review. The thesis proposal is assessed by the supervisory committee and approved by the Graduate Program Director."
HENV 885 "Comprehensive Exam " "The comprehensive exam is prepared in consultation with the supervisory committee and aims to ensure that the student has a sound knowledge of three areas of concentration within his or her field of research. The examining committee consists of the supervisory committee plus one additional member of the Department of Geography, Planning and Environment and is chaired by the Graduate Program Director. The student is evaluated on the quality of the written and oral responses to questions."
HENV 895 "Research and Thesis" "A major portion of the doctoral program involves the planning and execution of innovative and original research under the direction of a supervisor or two co-supervisors. The thesis is examined by a Thesis Examining Committee and is defended orally."
HENV 605 "Advanced Qualitative Research Methods" "This courseconsiderssome of the foundational theories that inform contemporary research in the fields of Human Geography and Urban Studies. It also explores a spectrum of qualitative research paradigms, theories andadvancedmethodologies relevant to social science. of qualitative research paradigms, theories and methodologies relevant to social science."
HENV 610 "Advanced Quantitative Research Methods" "This courseconsidersexperimental design andadvanceddata analysismethodsin Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting,advancedstatistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models."
HENV 620 "Sustainable Transportation" "This advanced seminar explores the different elements of what is broadly known as sustainable transportation. It considers the importance as well as the negative impacts of transport systems, and how these are described and captured methodologically. Of critical importance is the intimate link between land-use and transportation systems."
HENV 625 "Sustainable Resource Managemen" "This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated."
HENV 630 "Theories of Society and Space " "Human Geography is informed by a range of theories that have developed inside and outside the discipline. This course introduces students to some of the most influential of these theories as well as to theoretically-informed geographical literature. While students are exposed to foundational theories, the course focuses on critical geographical work that seeks to interpret the present moment."
HENV 635 "Spatial Analysis" "This course examines analytical methods for handling specifically spatial data, where the arrangement of observations in space is thought to be of significance. The emphasis is on the choice and application of appropriate methods for the analysis of various types of data that are encountered in Geography, Planning, and Environmental Studies. Procedures for analyzing spatial distributions of phenomena, temporal dynamics and change are examined in relation to Geographical Information Systems (GIS) tools and statistical techniques."
HENV 640 "(Re)shaping the City" "By relying on an array of theoretical formulations informed by political economy, economic geography, urban morphology, urban sociology, anthropology and ecology, this seminar explores various social processes that contribute to the shaping and reshaping of our cities material and spatial forms."
HENV 645 "Behaviour and the Urban Environment" "This course provides a basic understanding of the relationship between people and the urban environment. The focus is on the collective and individual responses of people to the built or designed environment, and the way in which these responses can be used to guide projects, plans and policies. The basic studies for the location of commercial facilities and the modelling of human spatial behaviour are introduced."
HENV 650 "The Political-Economy of the City" "This course explores the implications of economic globalization and neoliberalism for urban life in late capitalist (post-1970s) period. Drawing on literatures from the fields of planning, geography, and political economy, it focuses on how urban policies and services are being restructured and how these changes affect different social groups."
HENV 655 "Environmental Modelling" "The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory."
HENV 660 "Climate Change and Sustainability" "This seminar examines the interface between climatescience, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussionsare oriented around current literature ontopics such as the potential impacts of climate changeon vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunitiesto develop sustainable energysystems. The course also includesquantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets."
HENV 665 "Special Topics Seminar" "This course is designed to meet the special needs of individual graduate students. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas. Content involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from relevant scientific literature. The course will also take advantage of visiting expertise."
HENV 670 "Environmental Governance " "This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices."
HENV 675 "Community-Based Conservation" "This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings."
HENV 680 "Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science" "This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation."
HENV 690 "Seminar in Social and Cultural Geography" "This seminar introduces students to some important contemporary geographical approaches and topics in the study of society and culture. Specific themes may include globalization, migration, multiculturalism and diaspora, marginality, policing and imprisonment, and social movements. To provide a broad understanding of these themes, the course emphasizes analyses that draw upon geographical concepts of space, place, identity, and power."
HENV 605 "Advanced Qualitative Research Methods" "This courseconsiderssome of the foundational theories that inform contemporary research in the fields of Human Geography and Urban Studies. It also explores a spectrum of qualitative research paradigms, theories andadvancedmethodologies relevant to social science. of qualitative research paradigms, theories and methodologies relevant to social science."
HENV 610 "Advanced Quantitative Research Methods" "This courseconsidersexperimental design andadvanceddata analysismethodsin Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting,advancedstatistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models."
HENV 615 "Research Proposal Seminar" "Thisseminar provides an opportunity to extend, deepen, and apply the conceptual and methodological frameworks presented in the core and elective courses,through a combination of classroom discussions and attendance at departmental research seminars. Students are taught research and presentation skills and are guided through the process of preparing their thesis research proposal. Students need to submit a written research proposal to their thesis research supervisor(s) as a requirement for this course."
HENV 685 "Thesis Proposal " "Students are required to select their research topic and formulate a research proposal under the supervision of a thesis supervisor and with input from a thesis committee. The written proposal will include a sound rationale for the proposed research, a detailed description of the research design and methodology, and a comprehensive literature review. Students are also required to present an oral presentation of their proposal to the Department. The thesis proposal must be formally approved by the thesis committee and the Graduate Program Director before research activities can begin. The thesis proposal should be completed before the end of the second semester of residency in the Program and after a minimum of 6 credits in the Program have been taken."
HENV 695 "Thesis " "Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out original, independent research. The thesis, which will be researched and written under the direction of a supervisor and thesis committee, should normally not exceed 100 pages. Upon completion of the thesis, the student will be required to defend his/her thesis before an external examiner and his/her thesis committee."
GEOG 620 "Special Topics in Geography" "This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas."
GEOG 625 "Directed Studies" "With written permission of the graduate program director, a student studies a particular field or topic relating to geography, urban or environment studies. A detailed outline of the proposed study, approved by a study supervisor is required."
HENV 620 "Sustainable Transportation" "This advanced seminar explores the different elements of what is broadly known as sustainable transportation. It considers the importance as well as the negative impacts of transport systems, and how these are described and captured methodologically. Of critical importance is the intimate link between land-use and transportation systems."
HENV 625 "Sustainable Resource Management" "This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated."
HENV 630 "Theories of Society and Space " "Human Geography is informed by a range of theories that have developed inside and outside the discipline. This course introduces students to some of the most influential of these theories as well as to theoretically-informed geographical literature. While students are exposed to foundational theories, the course focuses on critical geographical work that seeks to interpret the present moment."
HENV 635 "Spatial Analysis " "This course examines analytical methods for handling specifically spatial data, where the arrangement of observations in space is thought to be of significance. The emphasis is on the choice and application of appropriate methods for the analysis of various types of data that are encountered in Geography, Planning and Environmental Studies. Procedures for analyzing spatial distributions of phenomena, temporal dynamics and change are examined in relation to Geographical Information Systems (GIS) tools and statistical techniques."
HENV 640 "(Re)shaping the City" "By relying on an array of theoretical formulations informed by political economy, economic geography, urban morphology, urban sociology, anthropology and ecology, this seminar explores various social processes that contribute to the shaping and reshaping of our cities material and spatial forms."
HENV 645 "Behaviour and the Urban Environment " "This course provides a basic understanding of the relationship between people and the urban environment. The focus is on the collective and individual responses of people to the built or designed environment, and the way in which these responses can be used to guide projects, plans and policies. The basic studies for the location of commercial facilities and the modelling of human spatial behaviour are introduced."
HENV 650 "The Political Economy of the City" "This course explores the implications of economic globalization and neoliberalism for urban life in late capitalist (post-1970s) period. Drawing on literatures from the fields of planning, geography, and political economy, it focuses on how urban policies and services are being restructured and how these changes affect different social groups."
HENV 655 "Environmental Modelling " "The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory."
HENV 660 "Climate Change and Sustainability" "This seminar examines the interface between climatescience, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussionsare oriented around current literature ontopics such as the potential impacts of climate changeon vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunitiesto develop sustainable energysystems. The course also includesquantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets."
HENV 665 "Special Topics Seminar " "This course is designed to meet the special needs of individual graduate students. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas. Content involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from relevant scientific literature. The course will also take advantage of visiting expertise."
HENV 670 "Environmental Governance " "This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices."
HENV 675 "Community-Based Conservation " "This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings."
HENV 680 "Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science " "This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation."
HENV 690 "Seminar in Social and Cultural Geography " "This seminar introduces students to some important contemporary geographical approaches and topics in the study of society and culture. Specific themes may include globalization, migration, multiculturalism and diaspora, marginality, policing and imprisonment, and social movements. To provide a broad understanding of these themes, the course emphasizes analyses that draw upon geographical concepts of space, place, identity, and power."
ENVS 601 "EA: Concepts, Principles and Practice " "Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.  This course aims to provide students with theoretical and practical knowledge related to environmental assessment and its role in project planning and policy development. The evolution of environmental assessment (EA), its current practices and functions, and future directionsarediscussed. The roles and components of EA and EA procedures in Canada (at both the federal and provincial levels)areemphasized. Guest speakers, regular readings and in-class discussions supplement the lectures."
ENVS 668 "Indigenous Peoples and Environmental Assessment(3 credits)" "Prerequisite:Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director."
BIOL 618 "Ecology for Environmentalists" "Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.  This course discusses the principles of the ecology of individuals, populations, communities and ecosystems and the effects of environmental disturbances ranging from immediate pollution to long-term climate change."
ECON 659 "Economics for Environmentalists" "Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.  This course considers one of the most serious problems facing our global civilization: the on-going conflict between economic activity and the bio-physical world upon which all human activity ultimately depends. The course explains the basic theoretical framework most economists use to describe economic activities and the relationship between these activities and the natural world. Understanding the logical apparatus of economics theory shows why market forces and environmental integrity are often in conflict and why economic arguments dominate environmental policy debates at both national and international levels."
ENVS 604 "Environmental Law and Policy" "Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Programme Director.  This course introduces students to environmental law and policy at the international, North American and regional levels with an emphasis on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) as a tool for promoting environmentally sound and sustainable development. The course provides an overview of issues such as environmental security, Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), banking and environmental finance, access to justice in environmental decision making, climate change, biodiversity, and green growth. The role of international organizations and Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) is given particular attention."
ENVS 605 "Environmental Standards" "Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.  This course provides an overview of the International Standards Organization (ISO) standards and guidelines for industry to implement a sound Environmental Management System (EMS). These guidelines are outlined in a series of publications designated as ISO 14000. Topics covered will include: the evolution and benefits of EMS, the ISO 14001 principles, integration between ISO 9001 and 14001, the registration process, auditing an EMS, life cycle assessment, and environmental labelling. Upon successful completion of the course, students are encouraged to pursue formal accreditation."
ENVS 620 "Advanced Topics in Environmental Assessment" "This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas."
GEOG 607 "Indigenous Peoples and the Environment" "This course provides an extended, in-depth exploration of the relationships and roles of Indigenous peoples with respect to their traditional territories and natural resources. Indigenous ontologies and epistemologies are highlighted in addition to Indigenous aspirations and approaches for use and stewardship of the environment. The course examines theoretical and case-study literature, with a broad regional focus on Aboriginal peoples in Canada while also drawing from comparative international experiences of Indigenous peoples."
GEOG 620 "Special Topics in Geography" "This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas."
HENV 610 "Advanced Quantitative Research Methods" "This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting, advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models."
HENV 625 "Sustainable Resource Management" "This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated."
HENV 660 "Climate Change and Sustainability" "This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets."
HENV 655 "Environmental Modelling" "The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory."
HENV 670 "Environmental Governance" "This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices."
HENV 675 "Community-Based Conservation" "This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings."
HENV 680 "Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science" "This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation."
ENVS 601 "EA: Concepts, Principles and Practice " "Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.  This course aims to provide students with theoretical and practical knowledge related to environmental assessment and its role in project planning and policy development. The evolution of environmental assessment (EA), its current practices and functions, and future directionsarediscussed. The roles and components of EA and EA procedures in Canada (at both the federal and provincial levels)areemphasized. Guest speakers, regular readings and in-class discussions supplement the lectures."
ENVS 668 "Indigenous Peoples and Environmental Assessment" "Prerequisite:Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.  Development projects are often located on or adjacent to Indigenous territories with significant impacts on their lands, lives and cultures. As such, Indigenous peoples require unique consideration within EA frameworks which should respect Indigenous and treaty rights, including international commitments (e.g. UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples) and court rulings related to: (1) Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) for development proposed on Indigenous lands; and (2) the inclusion of Indigenous knowledge and perspectives in decision-making. This seminar course surveys recent developments in these areas and explores the potential of EA to contribute to reconciliation between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples in Canada (and elsewhere)."
BIOL 618 "Ecology for Environmentalists " "Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.  This course discusses the principles of the ecology of individuals, populations, communities and ecosystems and the effects of environmental disturbances ranging from immediate pollution to long-term climate change."
ECON 659 "Economics for Environmentalists " "Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.  This course considers one of the most serious problems facing our global civilization: the on-going conflict between economic activity and the bio-physical world upon which all human activity ultimately depends. The course explains the basic theoretical framework most economists use to describe economic activities and the relationship between these activities and the natural world. Understanding the logical apparatus of economics theory shows why market forces and environmental integrity are often in conflict and why economic arguments dominate environmental policy debates at both national and international levels."
ENVS 604 "Environmental Law and Policy" "Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Programme Director.  This course introduces students to environmental law and policy at the international, North American and regional levels with an emphasis on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) as a tool for promoting environmentally sound and sustainable development. Thecourse provides an overview of issues such as environmental security, Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), banking and environmental finance, access to justice in environmental decision making, climate change, biodiversity, and green growth. The role of international organizations and Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) is given particular attention."
ENVS 605 "Environmental Standards " "Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.  This course provides an overview of the International Standards Organization (ISO) standards and guidelines for industry to implement a sound Environmental Management System (EMS). These guidelines are outlined in a series of publications designated as ISO 14000. Topics covered will include: the evolution and benefits of EMS, the ISO 14001 principles, integration between ISO 9001 and 14001, the registration process, auditing an EMS, life cycle assessment, and environmental labelling. Upon successful completion of the course, students are encouraged to pursue formal accreditation."
ENVS 620 "Advanced Topics in Environmental Assessment" "This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas."
ENVS 664 "Field Course in EA" "Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.   The goal of this course is to expose students to practical issues related to Environmental Assessment (EA). The course comprises: (1) in-class preparation meetings followed by (2) a one-week in-field experience. During this week, students meet practitioners and individuals from local communities, industries and/or governments involved in EA. Through these interactions, students are exposed to a diverse range of perspectives and experiences related to EA. The course is validated through an assessment of the knowledge acquired during the trip. Students are responsible for the cost of food, accommodation and transportation associated with the one-week field trip (cost varies depending on destination). "
GEOG 607 "IndigenousPeoples and the Environment" "This courseprovides an extended, in-depth exploration ofthe relationships and roles of Indigenous peopleswith respect to their traditional territories and natural resources. Indigenous ontologies and epistemologies are highlighted in addition to Indigenous aspirations and approaches for use and stewardship of the environment. The course examines theoretical and case-study literature, with a broad regional focus on Aboriginal peoples in Canada while also drawing from comparative international experiences of Indigenous peoples."
GEOG 620 "Special Topics in Geography" "This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas."
HENV 610 "Advanced Quantitative Research Methods" "This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting, advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models."
HENV 625 "Sustainable Resource Management" "This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated."
HENV 660 "Climate Change and Sustainability" "This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets."
HENV 655 "Environmental Modelling " "The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory."
HENV 670 "Environmental Governance " "This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices."
HENV 675 "Community-Based Conservation" "This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings."
HENV 680 "Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science " "This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation."
ENGL 800 "Pro-Seminar I: Theory" "This course is an advanced survey of literary theory, considering those thinkers whose work has beenparticularlyinfluential for the disciplines understanding of the nature and function of literature and its production. Figures to be studied may include Aristotle, Sidney, Nietzsche, Althusser, Lacan, Derrida, Barthes, Foucault, Deleuze, Irigaray, McLuhan, Badiou, Zizek, and Kristeva."
ENGL 801 "Pro-Seminar II: Methodology" "This course considers literary research under the aegis of a current or emergent methodological paradigm in the field e.g. Book History, Media Studies, Digital Humanities, Poetics, Psychoanalysis, Affect Theory, or Neuroaesthetics."
ENGL 802 "Professional Development Workshops" "The Department holds a series of workshops with the aim of introducing doctoral candidates to pertinent research, teaching, and professional expectations and enhancing career development. In order to graduate, all doctoral candidates must attend these workshops before the end of the sixth term. Master's students are also strongly encouraged to attend the relevant sessions since they are a constitutive component of graduate formation. If a student has attended a given workshop during his/her master's degree, he/she is exempted from that workshop."
ENGL 890 "Thesis Proposal " "Students are admitted to candidacy for the PhD upon acceptance by their advisory committee of the written thesis proposal and its successful defence. The oral examination of the written thesis proposal normally takes place in the term following the writing of the field examinations."
ENGL 891 "The Major Field Examination I" "This course focuses broadly on the candidates primary area of specialization, covering major authors, genres, and issues and the pertinent canonical texts therein, in order to consolidate the necessary background knowledge for advanced literary research and teaching at the university level. In the examination, candidates are expected to demonstrate comprehensive knowledge of the designated field as well as an original, critical understanding of the field and its constitutive texts.The Department has established reading lists in nine broad areas of specialization that cover a variety of periods, nations, and subjects. These basic lists may be modified to suit the interests of individual candidates. A substitution of 20 per cent is permitted for all reading lists for the purposes of tailoring the lists to the interests of the student. Such substitutions are to be determined by agreement between the student and the student's supervisor and are subject to approval by the Graduate Program Committee."
ENGL 892 "The Sub-Field Examination II" "This course is designed to cultivate a more specific area of inquiry that may include a body of literary texts in combination with readings in a particular set of methodological or theoretical problems to the end of developing a viable doctoral topic and composing a thesis proposal. The Sub-Field Examination list is established by the candidate in consultation with the doctoral supervisor and comprises approximately 60 items that are seen as directly relevant to the field in which the dissertation is oriented. It is divided into three sections: 1) approximately 20 literary texts; 2) approximately 20 theoretical/methodological texts; 3) approximately 20 texts drawn from adjacent and/or ancillary fields. By text, it means the number of poems or articles deemed by field specialists as sufficiently representative of an author's work or period. A text cannot appear twice on any of the lists, including that of the Major Field. The lists and texts are not exhaustive, but are meant to provide the student with the necessary initiation to sub-fields that help to clarify the direction and goals of the dissertation."
ENGL 895 "Thesis Research " "Doctoral students must submit a thesis based on their research and defend it in an oral examination."
ENGL 678 "Selected Area I" "Creative Writing Tutorial (one-term, 3-credit course)."
ENGL 679 "Selected Area II" "Creative Writing Tutorial (two-term, 6-credit course). The Creative Writing tutorials may be elected only by students in Option C. They are designed to accommodate candidates whose genre (e.g., poetry or drama) is not offered during a given academic year. Candidates wishing to enrol in ENGL 678 or 679 must submit a request to the Graduate Committee. Approval will in part depend upon the availability of resources and whether the Graduate Committee deems it beneficial for the student to undertake a tutorial course rather than a regularly scheduled course. Tutorial courses will be considered only exceptionally and for very able students."
ENGL 685 "Selected Area III" "ENGL 687 Selected Area IV"
ENGL 688 "Selected Area V" "Reading Course (one-term, 3-credit course)."
ENGL 689 "Selected Area VI" "Reading Course (two-term, 6-credit course). After completing at least a third of the course credits (transfer credits excluded), a student may submit a request to the Graduate Committee for permission to take up to 6 credits in a reading course to be provided through a tutorial arrangement. A reading course will be permitted only when the proposed general subject area has not been available during the span of the students program and where the Graduate Committee is satisfied that it is beneficial for the student to take a reading course rather than a regularly scheduled graduate course. Reading courses are approved only exceptionally and only students who have demonstrated a capacity for independent work and a very high calibre of academic performance will be considered. This applies to both ENGL 688 and ENGL 689."
ENGL 690 "Thesis" "ENGL 692 Creative Writing Thesis (21 credits)"
ENGL 693 "Bibliography" "The annotated bibliography constitutes a preliminary phase of the research essay. A student must successfully complete the annotated bibliography before producing the research essay. The approximate length of the annotated bibliography is 3,000 words and is supervised by the supervisor of the research essay. The bibliography is assessed on a pass/fail basis."
ENGL 694 "Research Essay" "Prerequisite: ENGL 693.  A research essay of approximately 10,000 words is supervised by a member of the department and assessed by another faculty member acting as reader. The essay is assessed on a pass/fail basis."
ETEC 613 "Learning Theories" "The primary goal of the course is for students to develop a critical understanding of classic and contemporary theories of learning, such as behaviourism, cognitivism, neo-cognitivism, and socio-constructivism as they inform instructional practice. Secondary course goals include enhancing students' abilities to: a) read and evaluate the primary literature in the area; b) present and write within the discipline; c) evaluate applications of theory to practice; and d) collaborate professionally including via computer conferencing."
ETEC 640 "Research Methods I" "This course provides an introduction to research methodologies germane to the field of educational technology. Students acquire competencies in analyzing, synthesizing and evaluating empirical research that employ quantitative, qualitative and mixed methodologies. Special emphasis is placed on acquiring skills to critique and review literature in educational technology."
ETEC 641 "Research Methods II" "Prerequisite:ETEC 640.  The principal aims of the course are to enablestudentsto evaluate the statistical information provided in reports of empirical research in the social sciences and use statistics in small scale studies. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of statistical tests, the assumptions underlying their use, and the interpretation of the results. The course also includes basic elements ofdataanalysis and synthesis in research employingqualitative methodologies."
ETEC 650 "Fundamentals of Instructional Design" "This course introduces students to instructional design, which refers to both the systematic process for preparing learning materials as well as to the theories and principles that guide that work. Working on a real-world project, students directly engage in the process and prepare an instructional program."
ETEC 651 "Fundamentals of Human Performance Technology" "Prerequisite:ETEC 650.  Building on the base of instructional design, this course introduces human performance technology (HPT). HPT is a set of principles and methods for identifying and solving problems that cannot be solved through instructional programs alone. Working on a real-world project, students design a variety of non-instructional interventions."
ETEC 671 "Administering Educational Technology Groups" "This course prepares students to integrate into the real-world practice of educational technology and to eventually assume leadership positions in organizations. Through readings, experiential learning activities, and other assignments, this course introduces students to the basic themes of administering educational technology groups: (a) business managementsuccessfully competing for work and resources needed to complete it; (b) project managementplanning work and overseeing its progress; and (c) people managementestablishing and managing expectations of, and relationships with, members of the group."
ETEC 672 "Project Management" "This course focuses on project management and its application to the fields of education and training. Special attention is placed on the different components of a project, but reviews of project management as a discipline, a process and a system are also undertaken. Following the established methodology proposed by national and international project management organizations, this course introduces the processes, skills, techniques and software tools required to effectively manage a project. Specific educational examples and cases of real-life projects are included in the course to describe how project management techniques can be used in education and training."
ETEC 673 "Consulting Skills for Educational Technologists" "Prerequisite:ETEC 650."
ETEC 791 "Internship (Non-Thesis Option)" "ETEC 792 Internship Report (Non-Thesis Option)(3 credits)"
ETEC 607 "Philosophical Issues in Educational Research" "Note:Students who have received credit for ADIP 501 or ESTU 601 or ETEC 507 may not take this course for credit."
ESTU 601 "Philosophical Issues in Educational Research" "There are a number of important philosophical questions that lie behind the everyday practice of education research. The questions include: What does it mean to say that research in education is scientific? Is science (and, by extension, educational research) really value neutral and objective? What kinds of education research should count as legitimate? In the first part of the course, various definitions of science, for example, those of Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn, and some influential critiques of the scientific enterprise are examined. In the second part of the course, some of the ongoing debates about appropriate research methods in education are analyzed."
ESTU 611 "Philosophical Perspectives in Education" "This course is a forum for common inquiry and reflection upon issues that have deep significance for our lives as human beings, students, and educators. Some emphasis is placed on gaining an understanding of historically significant philosophical positions and their application to problems of teaching and education. However, the primary focus is on cultivating a desire and commitment to engage in philosophical thinking as it applies to matters of concern to teachers and teaching. The course is premised on a number of questions. These include but are not limited to: What is education? How do we understand education in its moral, ethical and spiritual dimensions? What role does education play (or have the potential of playing) in personal and social transformation? What is effective teaching and how can we cultivate the courage to teach effectively?"
ESTU 612 "Historical Perspectives in Education" "This course acquaints students with a broad historical approach to a variety of significant educational issues. The emphasis will be placed on the examination of a number of critical components of modern educational thought and practice (comprising e.g., alternative schools of educational thought, politics and education, the changing curriculum, or the organization of schooling) as seen and presented in historical perspective."
ESTU 613 "Anthropological Concepts and Methods in Education" "The course introduces the students to qualitative methods in educational research. The first purpose is to review studies of education which utilize anthropological concepts and/or methods. The second purpose is to examine the three principal foci of qualitative research in the area: a. schools and their relations with the socio-cultural milieu in which they exist; b. the description and analysis of classroom processes; c. the study of individual pupils and educators. The third purpose is to assess the strengths and weaknesses of studies focusing on these areas. This includes describing and discussing some of the systematic methodological biases apparent in the literature and suggesting directions for future research."
ESTU 614 "Social Psychological Foundations of Education" "The course provides a basic understanding of the ways in which psychologists examine and analyze human behaviour, collect and interpret data, develop theories and form generalizations. It is not intended as a general survey course in the area of educational psychology. Several topics in an area will be studied in order to exemplify the methods and techniques employed in the psychological analysis of behaviour in educational settings."
ESTU 615 "Introduction to Research in Education" "By providing an overview of the commonly used research methods in education today, students gain the knowledge required to critique research that is reported in the education and social science literature. Topics include the nature of educational research, the different qualitative and quantitative research approaches, types of data collection, and knowledge of research ethics. Students gain experience in developing a research statement and writing a research proposal."
ESTU 635 "Studies in Educational Change" "This course is concerned with the investigation and comparison of problems of education in the context of time and society. Concentrating on concrete case studies chosen from the 19th century and the contemporary period, it focuses on the principles on which systems of education are constructed, and their change or retention, in the broad socio-economic and ideological context."
ESTU 644 "School and Society" "This course is concerned with the family, the educational system, the economy and the polity, and with the relations between them. The main concern is with social institutions and the socialization process with which they are involved. Particular emphasis will be placed on the social class differentials in the conditions of socialization and educational opportunity, and on social class differentials in educational achievement."
ESTU 670 "Adult Education as a Field of Study" "This course is designed as a survey at an advanced level, of the theory and practice of adult education through an examination of the existing literature. Emphasis will be placed on helping the student gain knowledge, understanding, and a critical perspective of the following: aims; history and philosophy; needs and characteristics of adult learners; functions and skills of adult education practitioners; settings, agencies and program areas; and planning and evaluation in adult education. A Canadian and Quebec perspective will be emphasized."
ESTU 602 "Educational Theory" "ESTU 603 The Philosophy of the Curriculum"
ESTU 680 "Reading Course " "ESTU 681 Reading Course "
ESTU 690 "Thesis and Tutorial (21 credits) " "ESTU 692 Directed Study (with Extended Essay or Research Project) (12 credits)"
EDUC 808 "Reporting Research" "This course prepares students to report their research to various stakeholders of educational research, including funding agencies, other researchers, journal editors, policy makers, and the public. Students prepare various research-related documents, and provide peer reviews."
EDUC 809 "Advanced Issues in Education" "This seminar explores one or more complex issues of education that has implications for Applied Linguistics, Child Studies, Educational Studies, and Educational Technology. During the course, students explore the research and popular literature on the topic, critically examine the epistemological, sociological, and theoretical bases of the literature, and relate the lessons learned to their own proposed research projects."
EDUC 890 "Comprehensive Examination" "EDUC 891 Doctoral Proposal (9 credits)"
ECON 805 "Doctoral Comprehensive Examination " "ECON 806 Doctoral Research Seminar (6 credits)"
ECON 807 "Doctoral Thesis " "ECON 814 Workshop in Advanced Economic Theory"
ECON 817 "Advanced Macro Theory" "Prerequisite: ECON 616. The course deals with the New Classical and New Keynesian macroeconomics, rational expectations and disequilibrium approaches. Emphasis is placed on model solution techniques, optimal control theory, and stochastic processes. Recent developments in empirical estimation will also be dealt with."
ECON 858 "Montreal Natural Resources and Environmental Economics Workshop" "Prerequisite: Permission of the department. This workshop, which is organized through the Centre Interuniversitaire de Recherche en Economie Quantiative (CIREQ), is intended for researchers and doctoral students in economics throughout Montreal who are interested in resource and environmental economics. The types of topics that may be dealt with, at an advanced level, are the economic theory of sustainable growth, green accounting, sunk costs and production constraints in natural resource exploitation, the irreversibility of environmental investment decisions, measures of biodiversity and their implications, the optimal order of extraction of natural resources, intertemporal depletion of spatially distributed nonrenewable resources, property rights and natural resource exploitation, applications of differential games to natural resource and environmental economics, and other related topics. The workshop is led by a team of researchers comprising professors from McGill University, Concordia University, Universit de Montral and HEC Montral who will actively participate in each meeting. A regular and active participation is expected of the doctoral students and other researchers who would like to join this work group."
ECON 878 "Workshop in Labour Economics" "Prerequisite: Permission of the department. The course covers topics related to specifying and estimating static and dynamic models of individual choice concerning education, occupation, labour supply, marriage, fertility, and immigration. Emphasis is placed on policy evaluation methods. The course covers both structural and nonstructural approaches. For each topic, theory, econometrics and applications are discussed. The course concludes with presentations by students of their on-going thesis work. The course is restricted to PhD students who plan to write a thesis in the field of labour economics. There is no textbook for this course. Instead, the course uses journal articles extensively to supplement the topics covered in the workshop."
ECON 612 "Microeconomics I" "Prerequisite: ECON 501 and 525; or equivalent.  This course is devoted to modern consumer and producer theories. Consumer theory is presented first, and at some length, due to its inherent importance, as well as the overlap between the methods and results in this area and in producer theory. Producer theory is dealt with next. In this section of the course, the similarities and differences between these two important building blocks of modern microeconomics are emphasized."
ECON 613 "Microeconomics II " "Prerequisites: ECON 612 and 614."
ECON 614 "Game Theory" "Prerequisite: ECON 612.  This course offers an in-depth coverage of some important topics in mostly non-cooperative but also cooperative game theory. Although formal reasoning, precise definitions and proofs are part of the course, emphasis is placed on the importance and use of the various concepts in economics. Main topics include Nash equilibrium and subgame perfection, correlated equilibria, rationalizability, zero sum games, repeated games, (perfect) Bayesian Nash equilibrium, core Shapley value, bargaining problems, and stable sets."
ECON 615 "Macroeconomics I" "Prerequisites: ECON 503 and 525; or equivalent."
ECON 616 "Macroeconomics II" "Prerequisite: ECON 615.  This course studies various issues in macroeconomic theory within a dynamic general equilibrium framework. Topics covered vary from year to year. However, the first part of the course is usually an initiation into useful techniques such as dynamic programming and the numerical methods."
ECON 618 "Monetary Economics" "Prerequisite: ECON 615.  This course includes the theory of money, monetary policy, payment systems, and banking. Among the available models, there will be a particular focus on the New Keynesian model as a framework to analyze monetary policy. Alternative models of money, such as search-theoretic models, are also studied."
ECON 619 "Political Economy" "Prerequisites: ECON 614 and 615."
ECON 620 "Development Planning I" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 503 and ECON 525; or equivalent."
ECON 621 "Development Planning II" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 503 and 525; or equivalent."
ECON 622 "Economic Development" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 503 and 525; or equivalent."
ECON 623 "Growth and Development" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 503 and 525; or equivalent."
ECON 624 "Topics in Economic Development" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 503 and 525; or equivalent."
ECON 642 "Financial Economics I" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 503 and 525; or equivalent."
ECON 643 "Financial Economics II" "Prerequisites: ECON 642 and 680."
ECON 656 "Public Finance: Expenditure" "Prerequisites: ECON 501 and 525; or equivalent."
ECON 657 "Public Finance: Taxation" "Prerequisites: ECON 501 525; or equivalent."
ECON 658 "Environmental Economics" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 525; or equivalent."
ECON 661 "International Trade" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 525; or equivalent."
ECON 662 "International Monetary Economics" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 503 and 525; or equivalent."
ECON 673 "Industrial Organization" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 525; or equivalent."
ECON 674 "Economics of Regulation" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 525; or equivalent."
ECON 677 "Labour Economics I" "Prerequisites: ECON 501, 525; or equivalent."
ECON 678 "Labour Economics II" "Prerequisites: ECON 612 and ECON 680."
ECON 680 "Econometric Theory I" "Prerequisites: ECON 521 and 525; or equivalent."
ECON 681 "Econometric Theory II" "Prerequisite: ECON 680.  This course covers advanced topics in estimation and inference in non-linear econometric models including asymptotic theory, generalized method of moments, quasi-maximum likelihood, simulation based methods, non-parametric and semiparametric estimation, bootstrap methods and robust estimators."
ECON 682 "Applied Econometrics: Time-Series" "Prerequisite: ECON 680.  This course provides an introduction to statistical techniques for analyzing time-series data. Topics include Box-Jenkins methodology, spectral analysis, forecasting, tests for unit roots, multivariate time-series analysis: vector autoregressions, causality, co-integration, and nonlinear time-series models such as ARCH models."
ECON 683 "Applied Econometrics: Microeconometrics" "Prerequisites: ECON 680 or equivalent, and one successfully completed graduate level course in econometrics, or permission of the instructor."
ECON 690 "Mathematical Economics" "Research, Theses, and Preliminary Examinations"
ECON 694 "Reading Courses in Economics" "With the permission of the Graduate Studies Committee a supervised reading course in a specialized area in which no course is offered by the Department."
ECON 695 "Seminar in a Special Topic" "Recent Special Topics have included: ECON 695C: Monetary Economics; ECON 695D: Game Theory; ECON 695E: Workshop in Advanced Economic Theory; ECON 695G: Applied Industrial Organization; ECON 695H: Empirical Trade; ECON 695J: Political Economics; ECON 695K: Natural Resources and Environmental Economics Workshop."
ECON 703 "Masters Research Paper" ""
SCPA 501 "Introduction to Community Economic Development " "This course provides an overview of CED. It traces the historical and intellectual roots of CED as well as critically situates CED in the context of theories of community, local and regional development. Students are provided with basic tools of macro-economic analysis and policy evaluation as it relates to the practice of CED. This course focuses on the institutional environment in which CED initiatives operate to identify the potential and the limitations of local, community-based development strategies. Special focus is given to the perspectives of CED arising out of the feminist movement, cultural communities, Aboriginal communities, the popular sector and other social change movements."
SCPA 502 "Comparative Approaches and Models in CED" "This course focuses on the objectives of CED by examining the various strategies and diversity of models of CED practices in Quebec, as well as many found elsewhere in Canada, the United States, in Europe and in southern hemispheric countries. The differences in organizational structures and empowerment processes, as well as their social, cultural and economic context is studied and evaluated, mainly through case studies of selected communities."
SCPA 503 "Fundamental Skills for CED Practice " "This course focuses on helping students acquire a working knowledge of the practical skills required for building community economic capacity. This includes developing tools to map the material, environmental and human resources within communities. This course assists students in designing socio-economic indicators and a framework for evaluation of CED initiatives and strategic planning. Students are encouraged to identify, as soon as possible, how the use of such skills can be incorporated into either a CED project or an internship within a CED initiative."
SCPA 504 "Community Organizing and CED" "This course focuses on helping students acquire a working knowledge of the practical skills required in community organizing and capacity building for individual and community empowerment within a CED context. The course explores the role of popular education in community mobilization and collective action, and delves into the strategies, tactics and techniques of community intervention."
SCPA 505 "Social Enterprise Development and Social Entrepreneurship" "This course provides a framework for business development within a CED perspective. Basic tools for enterprise development, including comprehensive business planning, data evaluation, financial analysis, and forecasting are to be integrated into a social and ethical framework to maintain the democratic objectives of CED. Students develop skills in evaluating a successful commercial venture within the context of these larger objectives."
SCPA 510 "CED Field Project - Part I " "SCPA 510 structures the Field Project. It introduces students to tools that can be used to design and implement their projects. During this course, students begin to implement their plan with the host organization. Assignments are based on the integration of the tools with the work undertaken in the field project."
SCPA 511 "CED Field Project - Part II " "Prerequisite: SCPA 510. Students continue their field project for a second term within the framework of this course. They build on the practice of the previous term and advance it to reach the objectives established with their host organization. This course aims to strengthen the students skills in the critical evaluation of practice. Students examine their practice and the reasons for its success, as well as examine strategies for overcoming the barriers they faced. This course offers a framework for the final written report required of students, to be both shared with their host organizations and submitted for the course."
SCPA 508 "Financing CED Initiatives: Part I " "This course examines the roles which can be played by both traditional (banks) and non-traditional (community loan funds) financial institutions in supporting CED initiatives. Special emphasis is placed on exploring alternative financial CED structures. Skills are developed to understand and generate financial planning, as well as investment decisions in traditional and non-traditional enterprises."
SCPA 509 "Financing CED Initiatives: Part II" "Prerequisite: SCPA 508. This course uses a case study approach to critically examine and evaluate existing alternative CED initiatives in Canada and the US. This may include on site visits, interviews and occasional guest lecturers."
SCPA 515 "Housing and Land Use from a CED Perspective: Part I" "This course examines the institutional, economic, political, and environmental factors which affect land policy, and the development of affordable housing. It identifies public and private financial sources and various forms of ownership models including community land trusts and housing cooperatives, among others. Among the skills developed are those related to market analysis and housing needs assessment, site selection and control, and preparing housing projects."
SCPA 516 "Housing and Land Use from a CED Perspective: Part II" "Prerequisite: SCPA 515. This course uses a case study approach to critically examine and evaluate existing housing projects, affordable housing and land policy based on a selection of experiences in the U.S. and in Canada. This may include on site visits, interviews and occasional guest lecturers."
SCPA 522 "Communications, Technology and CED: Part I" "This course explores issues related to information management, analysis and dissemination using different vehicles available including mass media, the Internet, and other new technologies as they emerge. Basic computer literacy is required."
SCPA 523 "Communications, Technology and CED: Part II" "Prerequisite: SCPA 522. This course equips practitioners with skills required to share and diffuse CED practices across communities that work in isolation and helps to develop the skills required for communities to use the new technologies and resources necessary for development purposes."
SCPA 529 "International Development and CED: Part I " "This course explores community-based economic development approaches in countries of the South within their socio-political and historical context. Many economic initiatives in the North have borrowed from these experiences. The course explores the advantages and disadvantages of importing and exporting development models and practices and equips the students with the skills to evaluate the appropriateness of CED models and how to adapt the models, wherever required."
SCPA 530 "International Development and CED: Part II " "Prerequisite: SCPA 529. This course explores existing North/South networking and collaboration by identifying non-governmental organizations, community groups and social movements which are working together to develop CED strategies in their respective countries. Discussion is encouraged through class seminars and occasional guest lectures."
SCPA 536 "Aboriginal CED: Part I " "This course assists participants in exploring specific issues related to Aboriginal community economic development in particular settings (on reserve, urban, rural and northern communities), and addresses challenges common to Aboriginal CED. The course assists participants in exploring historical and contemporary relationships between Aboriginal communities and the predominant cultural and economic forces, and compares traditional Aboriginal organizing and economic practices with the new approaches being proposed by CED."
SCPA 537 "Aboriginal CED: Part II " "Prerequisite: SCPA 536. This course uses a case study approach to evaluate one or more community economic development strategies applied within an Aboriginal community. A historical overview of this experience outlines the cultural and political context which has shaped these strategies as well as their results. CED approaches are examined in the context of this individual experience. This course may include on site visits and guest lecturers."
SCPA 543 "A-Z Open Sessions" "The themes and content of the various open sessions are determined at the beginning of each academic year. Three open sessions are offered every year (1 credit each for a total of 3 credits). Possible topics may include: feminist approaches to CED, lobbying decision-making bodies, consensus management, coalition-building, and using the internet for community development purposes - as well as topics related to current events."
COMS 510 "Graduate Diploma Seminar" "This full-year course meets bi-weekly to introduce students to the following topics: communication organizations and their public identities, internships and professional development opportunities, emerging trends in communications research methods and practice. Representatives from industry and faculty are invited to discuss their work and future trends in media studies and practice. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis."
COMS 562 "Media Production: Sound" "This course is designed to provide the student with a basic working knowledge of audio systems, both natural and electronic, to understand the various affective and psychological qualities of sound, and how sound may be structured into imaginative aural form. Lectures and Laboratory: average 6 hours per week."
COMS 569 "Media Production:Moving Images" "This course provides a foundation in the creative, critical and technical aspects of moving images, including an introduction to non-linear editing software."
COMS 570 "Media Production: Intermedia" "This course provides an introduction to new and developing digital technologies (primarily computer-based media) through historical, theoretical, and critical perspectives on media, culture, and society and includes basic concepts in software operating systems, communication design and digital media creation. Lectures and Laboratory: average 6 hours per week."
COMS 507 "Advanced Scriptwriting for Media" "Prerequisite: Submission of a sample of creative writing by June 30 and subsequent approval by the instructor.  This course provides an in-depth approach to writing for specific media. Emphasis is placed upon structure, story-telling, research, and the interplay of character and action. Different paradigms for both fiction and non-fiction are considered."
COMS 512 "Discourses of Dissent" "This course examines the forms and tactics of public discourses directed toward social change. Forms of public discourse that may be considered include speech, images, audiovisual works, as well as web-based sites or forms of communication. Emphasis is placed upon political protest, conflict and controversy, and mobilization. Themes explored include the development of speaking positions, the use of unconventional tactics, and the appropriation or rejection of received values."
COMS 513 "Cultures of Production" "Drawing on a range of recent field studies exploring the creative workplace (e.g. television production, the fashion industry, ad agencies, graphic design companies, the music business), this course frames commercial cultural production as a site of active agency, negotiation, and constraint through readings, discussion, and the design and execution of field research projects."
COMS 514 "Production Administration" "This course focuses on the language, skills and strategies necessary for producing media projects and events. Administration, organization, permits and permissions, fundraising, liability and contracts, team building, distribution and writing are just a few of the areas that are examined as students learn the skills necessary to be a producer."
COMS 516 "Advanced Topics in Documentary Film and Video" "This course provides an in-depth study of selected film and video documentary genres. Specific topics for this course will be stated in the Class Schedule."
COMS 518 "Cultures of Globalization" "This course examines the significance of communication technologies to the process of globalization, which has increased and accelerated the movement of people and commodities across the world. The resulting transnational networks of cultural, economic, political, and social linkages and alliances are considered, as is the role of media in engendering new forms of community and identity."
COMS 519 "Communications and Indigenous Peoples" "Focusing on Canadian First Peoples territories in the North and South, as well as selected circumpolar regions, such as parts of Australia and other areas of the world inhabited by indigenous peoples, this course examines from a global perspective the historical, theoretical, and cross-cultural content and contexts of aboriginal media and financing, audience research, product development, distribution issues, and policy formation. Broadcasting, print, and digital media case studies and materials are central components."
COMS 521 "Communication Technologies and Gender" "Feminist theories of communication technologies are used to critique the impact and meanings of these technologies in various spheres of cultural activity. Topics include the mass media, technological mediations in organizations and institutions, and the re-articulation of domestic and public spaces, such as the Internet and the World Wide Web. Special attention is paid to these electronic and digital technologies - or new media - and the communicational and representational possibilities they enable or foreclose. The class is conducted as an intensive seminar. Completion of a prior course in womens studies or gender studies at the university level is recommended."
COMS 522 "Perspectives on the Information Society" "This course critically examines the political, social, and ethical dimensions of the information society within Canada and throughout the world. The development of the information society is placed in a socio-historical context. The significance of information and communication technologies is considered and the role of global information and communication policies is examined."
COMS 523 "Media Art and Aesthetics" "This course examines the aesthetic principles pertinent to the analysis and creation of works within communication media. Topics may include the field of perception, the role of cognition, the elements of composition, and the interplay of form and meaning. Both the static and dynamic aspects of visual and aural elements are considered."
COMS 524 "Alternative Media" "This course examines various alternatives to mainstream media. These alternatives may include community radio and video, independent film, the internet, and other emergent cultural forms such as the pastiche and parody of culture jamming. The concepts of mainstream and alternative are explored and the relationship between alternative media and social practices is considered."
COMS 525 "Media Forecast" "This course examines trends in film, sound, television, and other media for future applications. The course includes theory of media effects. Representatives from industry and government are invited to discuss future trends in media utilization. The course demands a theoretical and practical model for original or novel use of a medium or media mix."
COMS 532 "Communication, Culture and Popular Art" "This course offers an advanced examination of popular culture. With attention to such phenomena as hit films and television shows, stars, fans and pop art, this course focuses on the formation of hierarchies of value in cultural forms. This course examines how some cultural products come to be celebrated while others are dismissed. It also considers social and political consequences of divisions of high and low culture."
COMS 533 "Semiotics" "This course provides a detailed introduction to the semiotics of communication. The course considers the formal characteristics of signs and codes and examines how signs or texts produce meaning. Central to this course is the notion that sign-systems are fundamental to the production of knowledge and ideology. The course proceeds through lectures, an analytical reading of assigned texts, and student discussion and presentations."
COMS 534 "Advanced Topics in Film Studies" "Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under COMS 517 may not take this course for credit."
COMS 535 "Communications, Development and Colonialism" "This course discusses the role media can play in indigenous and international development. The concept of development communications is examined in the context of debates within neo-colonial and post-colonial theories."
COMS 537 "Race, Ethnicity and Media" "This course addresses practical and theoretical issues of race and ethnicity that have become focal points for current debates in public cultural expression and media studies. The following themes are discussed: cultural/racial difference and its implications for media studies; the (mis)representation of multicultural and multiracial minorities in mainstream and alternative media; questions of access to arts and other cultural funding sources; implications of employment equity legislation in light of media budget cuts; and cross-cultural awareness programs vs. anti-racist training for media professionals. Theoretical readings which frame issues of cultural and racial representation are an integral part of this course."
COMS 538 "Organizational Communication" "This course considers major approaches to organizational communication in relation to shifting patterns of power, inequality and technological change. Topics include communication networks, organization culture, bureaucracy, systematically distorted communication, gendered communication, the impact of new communication technologies, and patterns of organizational dominance and resistance. Case studies of particular organizations are examined."
COMS 539 "Political Communication" "The relationships between forms of communication and political structures and processes are examined. Topics include freedom of expression, the role of communication in mediating conflict, the place of deliberation and debate in democracy, political campaigns and advertising, and the relationship between styles of communication and models of governance."
COMS 540 "Acoustic Communication and Design" "This course investigates contemporary theories of acoustic communication and design, such as Attalis concept of noise, Schaeffers theory of the sound object, Schafers concept of soundscape, Chions cinema for the ear, and Augoyards repertoire of sound effects. Students engage in critical analysis of selected sound texts from various media."
COMS 541 "Sexuality and Public Discourse" "This course analyzes and explores the ways sexuality circulates in, and as, public discourses. Through a variety of conceptual formations and critical conceptualizations of the public and sexuality, this course analyzes conceptually and critically how sexuality and the notion of the public are mutually constitutive. The seminar is interdisciplinary and draws upon works in feminist studies, queer theory, political philosophy, history, cultural studies and communication theory."
COMS 542 "Advanced Topics in the Photographic Image" "This course explores the themes and concerns associated with particular photographic practices. Through class discussion, visual materials, readings and writing projects, students develop a critical understanding of the history, language and aesthetics of the photographic image."
COMS 543 "Film Criticism" "This course provides an introduction to the assumptions, methodologies, and vocabularies implicit in important schools of popular and academic film criticism."
COMS 544 "Reception Studies" "This course examines recent theory and research trends in the area of media reception studies and audience agency. Topics may include discursive, institutional, observational and ethnographic approaches through readings, discussion, and the design and execution of field research projects."
COMS 545 "Television Studies" "This course examines recent research focusing on television. Topics may include technological and industrial changes, audience activity, new genres, and representational conventions."
COMS 546 "Rhetoric and Communication" "This course focuses upon communication as persuasive or as producing identification. Emphasis is placed upon the role of communication in civic affairs. Classical and contemporary approaches to rhetorical theory and criticism are examined."
COMS 547 "International Communication" "This course explores historical and current parameters of international communications within the context of current global shifts in power/knowledge relations. Discussion topics are selected from among the following: key development and neo-colonial theories, cultural/media imperialism, globalization, the UN infrastructure, the Right to Communicate debates, national sovereignty issues, international broadcasting, cross-cultural audience reception research and effects theories, telediplomacy, the World Wide Web and the Internet, women as an international constituency group, and others."
COMS 548 "Media Policy in Canada" "This course acquaints the student with the historical development of media policy in Canada. It examines the government regulation of media as well as the strategies that have been put in place to foster and guide the development of media and cultural industries. It also considers the present state of broadcasting, telecommunications and internet policies in Canada, focusing on current problems and exploring alternative solutions."
COMS 553 "Communication Ethics" "This course allows students to confront issues of creative responsibility and ethical dilemmas in media practice. Emphasis is placed upon the relationship between production and theory at the level of ethical responsibility. Specific issues include ethical theories as applied to media, communication and information; the relationship of human values and technologies of information reproduction; the possibilities of critical media practice; identification of challenges emerging from experience in Communication Studies."
COMS 561 "Communicative Performances and Interventions" "This course examines how media can be used in order to intervene in social and cultural issues. Emphasis is placed on the performative character of interventions: they occur at a particular time and in a particular place, they are addressed to and seek to move particular audiences. Topics may include the history of performance strategies, the social and political character of aesthetic interventions, and the forms of such performances in relation to various media of communication."
COMS 580 "Selected Topics in Communication Studies" "COMS 583 Internship in Communication Studies"
COMS 585 "Directed Study in Communication Studies" "This course may be repeated as COMS 586."
COMS 586 "Directed Study in Communication Studies" "Prerequisite: COMS 585.  Students may enrol in a directed study under faculty supervision in order to undertake a specialized study of research-related topics. Permission of the Graduate Program Director is required."
COMS 598 "Advanced Topics in Communication Studies" ""
COMS 800 "Integrative Seminar " "This course proposes to engage first-year students in an epistemological conversation concerning different approaches to the conceptualization of communication and to the range of research problematics elaborated in the field and in the program. The expected outcomes include: a broad understanding of the relations between different domains within the discipline; the ability to recognize the links between epistemological assumptions, theory construction, the formation of research problematics and methodological approaches; a familiarization with the main fields of strength within the program; and the development of the ability to engage in dialogue with colleagues in different domains of research."
COMS 835 "Doctoral Pro-Seminar" "Note:Students who have received credit for COMS 830 may not take this course for credit."
COMS 805 "Research Workshop" "This research workshop is supervised by the students thesis director and is intended to respond to a particular need unfulfilled by the program. It can take various forms, namely a directed readings program, a specific project within a research group, an elective course (including a masters level course) or a research or creation internship. The research workshop must be defined in a specific agreement between the thesis supervisor and the student, which is approved by the program director and added to the students file."
COMS 822 "Advanced Seminar in Research Methods I" "This course provides an in-depth analysis of methodological problematics. Major contemporary methods of analysis are considered. Possible themes include research design, data-gathering techniques and instruments, and qualitative or quantitative procedures for data analysis. Specific topics may vary from year to year."
COMS 823 "Advanced Seminar in Research Methods II" "Students who have registered for COMS 822 must register for COMS 823 when taking a second Advanced Seminar in Research Methods course."
COMS 841 "Cultural Industries " "This course examines commodification and industrialization processes as well as the dissemination and consumption of culture within contemporary social formations, while focusing on one or more sectors of the cultural industries. The analytical approach considers themes such as characteristics ofmerchandising cycles,work and market organization, symbolic and cultural specificity of cultural-industries products, and relationships between technological innovation and cultural form."
COMS 842 "Media Reception" "This course examines media reception. It explores different theoretical and methodological approaches to the study of individual group practices and cultural consumption. The course looks at case-study material drawn from specific media or media genres (e.g. popular music, soap operas, childrens programming). The seminar considers such approaches as media ethnography, focus-group research, audience research, life histories, and other context specific micro-social approaches."
COMS 843 "Communication Policy" "This course examines the history and development of state intervention and regulation of the media. It may focus on communication policy nationally or internationally. The course considers such issues as the role of public policy in the development of public media and the public sphere, models of regulation and deregulation, the relations between regulatory agencies and interest groups, and the position of communication policies within larger governmental structures."
COMS 844 "Uses of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) " "Observing usage of information and communication objects and technical devices allows us to understand the effect of technologies within society. This course explores different theoretical and methodological approaches pertinent to analyzing ICT usages. With respect to course discussions and papers, particular attention may be paid to the interaction between user and technical device; articulation between artifact user and creator; usage situation within the organizational context; embedding of political dimensions in technological design; usage micro-situations and macro-sociological issues. Some major research traditions may be introduced, namely, dissemination of artifacts, sociotechnical innovation, common practices and significations, pragmatic approaches, social and socio-political appropriation of usages."
COMS 851 "Speech Communication" "This course examines discourse as action. Forms of discourse considered may range from interpersonal communication to public address. Possible theoretical approaches include ethnomethodology, conversational analysis, rhetorical theory, and performance studies."
COMS 853 "Discourse and Representation" "The course examines discourse with respect to representation. It focuses on the structuring of knowledge and identity within sign systems. Emphasis may range from the cognitive and psychological to the social and cultural."
COMS 854 "Discourse within Social Formations" "This course examines discourse as social mediation. Possible themes include the interrelation of power and knowledge, the organization of culture through signifying practices, and the production of discourse and social institutions."
COMS 861 "Organizational Culture" "This course examines how cultural analysis can be brought to bear in understanding organizational life. To this end, a range of theoretical approaches are drawn upon, including conversational analysis, ethnography, ethnomethodology, symbolic interactionism, enactment theory, and socio-linguistics. Aspects of organizations such as norms, rituals, folklore, traditions, common ideals, ideologies, shared symbols, core values and interaction are given particular attention."
COMS 864 "Communication and Change in Organizations" "This course addresses a major question within organizations at both theoretical and practical levels. It focuses on issues of innovation or transformation in an organizational framework using various approaches (functionalist, critical, post-modern, constructivist, interpretative). This perspective is pertinent for analyzing the context and process of change within cultural or development organizations as well as private, public or charitable undertakings."
COMS 873 "Identities and Cultural Exchange" "Within the context of electronic, information, and market-globalization forces, traditional geopolitical borders have become porous and easily penetrable. This course focuses on the hybrid identities emergent and negotiated from cross-cultural engagements and transnational communication at the beginning of the 21st century. Curricular materials include theoretical readings, case studies, and audiovisual materials focused on bridging cultural and political gaps."
COMS 874 "Globalization of Communication" "This course examines the emergence of a global communication system. Possible topics include international information flow, the circulation of communication products and communication issues as they are reflected in international accords and debates, and the role of media in issues of cultural development, democratization, and resistance to globalization."
COMS 875 "Technology and Organization" "This course analyzes and critiques various theoretical approaches which account for the relationship between technology and organization. It also provides the grounds for a communicational reflection on phenomena associated with the presence of information and communication technologies within organizations."
COMS 876 "Media Technology as Practice" "This course examines relationships between theory and practice in the work of individuals and groups of media practitioners across a range of genres and working contexts. Analysis can focus on the organization of the workplace, the creative process and social forces influencing media praxis."
COMS 877 "International Communication and Development" "This course traces the history of the different paradigms related to communication and development. It proposes a critical analysis of the theoretical perspectives suggested in both Southern and Northern contexts. The topics considered include Canadian and foreign institutions, policies, and programs, the role of international fora, as well as globalization and development. Case studies may focus on a specific region of the world."
COMS 878 "Communication, Conflict and Peace" "This course examines the various ways in which discourses of war, conflict, and peace are constructed and relayed through the mass media and other forms of technologically-mediated communication. In particular, how do the inherent properties of different modes of communication intersect with larger discursive formations to reproduce dominant definitions and unquestioned categories of social knowledge related to issues of peace and conflict? What role do the media play in shaping our understanding of war and warfare? How does the internet contribute to promoting both conflict and peace? How is peace represented as an end state that is desirable; for whom is peace being constructed; and what are the kinds of actions being promoted or encouraged in the name of peace?"
COMS 879 "Human-Computer Interactions" "This seminar examines human-computer interaction models and research in various fields of media communication; virtual worlds, e-commerce, distance education, sharing of knowledge and resources, adaptive technologies, systems intelligence and customization. Other topics include principles of interface design and assessment in cognitive ergonomics."
COMS 880 "Communication Networks and Organization" "This course examines and analyzes communication networks in a constructivist perspective with respect to two main social-networks traditions (anthropological and structural). It considers communication networks according to the themes explored by scholars in the field such as diffusion, social support and capital, organizational phenomena, social movements or ICTs. The seminar also includes methodological aspects of the study of communication networks, their emergence, and their transformation."
COMS 882 "Communication, Democracy and Power " "This course considers the communicative structure and performance of democracy within modern society. Attention is paid to the discursive resources available to perform and affect democracy, the constitution of democratic agents, the role of media in constituting and maintaining a public sphere, communicative strategies, norms of regulation and power, the performance of difference and various aspects of public culture."
COMS 883 "History and Historiography of Media and Culture" "This course examines the development of communication technologies and the media in comparative and historical perspective. Themes of time, space, place and power and their reconfiguration in relation to media and communication are given particular attention. Class members are encouraged to think about how they might engage in research on the history of media as part of their dissertation projects. To this end, historiographical issues are examined throughout the course, along with methodological consideration given to how one works with documentary and archival records."
COMS 884 "Cultural Theory in Communication Studies" "This course introduces students to cultural studies and its entwinement with the development of the field of communications. Key readings in Marxist approaches to culture, British Cultural Studies, and its US and Canadian variants are covered in the first half of the course. The remaining weeks expand the national and conceptual specificity of the cultural studies tradition. Topics include cultural and representational politics, issues of identity, resistance, hegemony, and ideology."
COMS 885 "Popular Culture" "This course focuses upon the political dimension of popular culture and the intellectual challenges it poses to scholarship. It concentrates upon the conceptual and historical aspects of the study of popular-cultural forms, their production and consumption, as well as their assessment. The course introduces key ideas and issues in popular-cultural studies, beginning with the rise of interest in mass culture during the late-19th and early-20th centuries. It also encounters modes of examining and understanding popular texts and sites of popular consumption. Issues of subjectivity, community, ideology, cultural hierarchies, and mass society are addressed."
COMS 886 "Alternative Media" "This course examines the array of alternative communication practices that inform social movements emerging from the margins. It focuses on the conditions of their effectiveness and mechanisms that facilitate or impede their success, such as the external social forces that influence their cooptation, commodification and evacuation of revolutionary potential."
COMS 887 "Strategies and Styles in Communication" "This course considers the strategies and styles of communication as intentional symbolic activity. Communication is examined as a practice that responds to and transforms situations and contexts. Emphasis is placed on the form, manner, and consequences of such practices, as well as on the major paradigms informing different approaches to the study of discourse and mediated messages."
COMS 888 "Discourses of the Body" "Critical theorists have identified the body as a site of competing and multiple discourses. The course examines some of the ways in which different bodies have been constructed in the media and how these both constrain and provide latitude for the expression of identities. A central area of inquiry is the context of the historical and contemporary terrain that informs the expression and categorization of these identities."
COMS 889 "Theories of Organizational Communication" "This course surveys and juxtaposes how some of the main approaches to organizational studies have dealt with issues related to communication. Paradigms considered may include scientific management, human relations, cybernetics, political economy, rational decision making, cultural studies, feminism, and post-modernism. An effort is made to examine how these various approaches emerged historically in relation to shifting patterns of power, inequality, and technological change. Issues such as the nature of bureaucracy, domination and resistance, systematically distorted communication, and public relations/external communication are addressed."
COMS 891 "Communication Technologies and Society " "This course introduces students to and contextualizes the main paradigms with respect to research on social, economic and cultural aspects of information and communication technologies. Critical analysis focuses on their epistemological assumptions and premises, main categories of analysis, and privileged issues. Attention is paid to the political economy of the information system."
COMS 892 "Epistemology and Methodology of Media Creation" "This seminar seeks to develop a position of poiesis (production) and to differentiate it from the position of aisthesis (reception). In order to define the multiple aspects of media creation, the following themesarediscussed:creationistic accounts and theses; the spectacle as ritual, achievement and imitation of reality; agents, machines and living organisms; functions of transmitting information andstorytelling. Operational concepts consideredmayinclude granularity, linearity, interactivity, diegesis, spatialization, indexicalizationand enunciation."
COMS 893 "Advanced Seminar in Special Topics in the PhD in Communication" "This seminar permits the in-depth examination of particular special topics in media and communication. Topics vary from year to year."
CHST 600 "Advanced Child Development" "This course presents an overview of the theories that have helped to shape the field of child development. The impact of various theoretical approaches (e.g., psychoanalytic, cognitive, behavioral, social) is examined by providing perspectives on issues of both historical and contemporary importance."
CHST 603 "Seminar: Issues in Child Studies" "This course provides students with an overview of the field of child studies. Students are introduced to diverse issues through the work of program faculty, invited scholars and student initiatives."
CHST 608 "Field Observations" "Prerequisite: CHST 605 and CHST 606, or equivalent.  This course addresses a range of observational techniques for observing children in their natural environments (e.g., running records, time and event sampling, rating scales). Students learn to use a variety of observational methods, analyze the information, and write reports. Students spend approximately 2-3 hours weekly in an appropriate setting to conduct the observations."
CHST 610 "Applied Cognition and Learning" "This course provides an overview of the ways in which cognition has contributed to the understanding of how children engage in the content of school subjects, such as mathematics, science, literacy and history. Topics include general cognitive processes, such as memory, transfer, metacognition, and expertise, as well as those related to learning in specific content areas. The course examines ways in which theory and empirical findings can and have informed instructional practice."
CHST 614 "Social Processes" "This course addresses issues regarding the development of critical social processes in the life of the child, which have implications for later functioning. Topics include the importance of early emotional development (e.g., attachment, temperament, emotional regulation) for social interaction, peer relations (e.g., friendships, bullying and victimization, prosocial behaviour), the development of self and social understanding, the role of play in development, and gender roles and socialization."
CHST 618 "Childhood Settings" "This course examines a variety of extra-familial settings in which children and families function (e.g. child care, kindergarten, elementary school, after school programs, recreation programs, hospital settings, programs for children with special needs). Various aspects of these programs are examined such as mission statements, program philosophy, training requirements, regulations, and professional development requirements. Methods to evaluate the quality of the settings are presented. Students learn to analyze a specific program of their choosing and write a case study report. Guest lectures and field trips to different types of settings may form part of the course."
CHST 620 "Childrens Play: From Theory to Practice" "This course introduces students to the topic of play with an emphasis on relating theory to practice. Historical and modern theories (e.g., psychoanalytic, cognitive, and social cognitive) of play are discussed. Various definitions and types of play that emanate from theoretical approaches and different approaches to measuring play are covered, as well as the relationship between childrens play and domains of development and culture, and curriculum and teaching. Issues related to designing developmentally appropriate play spaces and materials are examined."
CHST 622 "The Family" "This course addresses major theoretical perspectives on family functioning and the nature of parenting (e.g., transitions to parenting, attachment, child rearing styles, parenting children with special needs) and family relationships (e.g., parent-child, sibling, grandparents). Issues related to the modern Canadian family are also discussed (e.g., single and adolescent parents, divorce and remarriage, parental employment, child care, transition to school, and diversity of family lifestyles)."
CHST 624 "Curriculum Models in Childhood Settings" "This course examines principles and models of curriculum in relation to a range of early childhood settings, including daycare, after school programming, kindergarten, and elementary school. The focus is on analyzing current curriculum models from different perspectives as well as identifying and discussing issues related to curriculum design and implementation. Student interests and areas of study are taken into account in the selection of the readings, interactive curriculum materials, and resources."
CHST 630 "Issues in Education: Language, Literacy, Numeracy, and Scientific Reasoning" "In this course, students reflect on specific aspects of cognitive development and their impact on education. Topics are offered on a rotating basis and may include the development of language, literacy, numeracy and/or scientific reasoning. The literature on selected topics is examined, with particular emphasis on both classic and current research."
CHST 632 "Issues in Inclusive and Special Education" "This course examines theoretical issues in inclusive and special education and focuses on educational practices that provide all children with equitable access to learning. Curricula, policies and practices in educational settings are analyzed and provide students with an in-depth understanding so as to meet the needs of diverse learners."
CHST 640 "Special Topics in Child Studies" "Note: Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g., CHST 640A, CHST 640B, etc."
CHST 650 "Directed Study" "Students may enrol in a directed study under faculty supervision in order to undertake specialized study of theoretical or research-related topics. Permission of the Graduate Program Director is required."
CHST 695 "Internship Seminar and Field Placement" "Prerequisite: CHST 605 and CHST 606, or equivalent.  The internship is designed to provide students with the opportunity to investigate an applied problem or topical issue in child studies. Course requirements include a seminar in both terms. In the first term, students are required to keep a journal, conduct on-site observations, and formulate a written proposal for the internship project. In the second term, students will conduct their project and maintain their journal. Students are required to spend a minimum of 75 hours in the field placement in the first term and an additional 125 hours (minimum) in their second term."
CHST 696 "Internship Report" "The final report is a detailed record of the internship project and includes a description and analysis of all work produced for the field placement. In addition, all instruments, curricular materials, journal entries, and other supporting documents are included in the final report."
CHST 697 "Thesis Proposal" "Under the supervision of a thesis supervisor, the student writes a proposal presenting a research topic; the overall goal of which is to demonstrate that the student is capable of undertaking an independent research project."
CHST 698 "Research and Thesis" "The thesis consists of the formulation and presentation of the research results which are then defended before a committee consisting of the students supervisor and at least two other scholars from the department and/or scholars from relevant disciplines in other departments or institutions."
CHEM 610 "Selected Topics in Analytical Chemistry" "This course explores themes within the area of Analytical Chemistry."
CHEM 612 "Analytical Separations" "Prerequisite: CHEM 218, 312, or equivalent.  High performance liquid separations on an analytical (non-preparative) scale are surveyed. Fundamental separation mechanisms and application of the techniques are discussed. Emphasis is placed on separations of biologically relevant analytes which include peptides, proteins and nucleic acids. Lectures only."
CHEM 614 "Modern Aspects of Practical Mass Spectrometry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 494 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.  Theoretical and operational aspects of modern mass spectrometry are discussed in a number of formal lectures and training sessions. All students must carry out an independent mass spectrometry project on their molecules of choice. Projects can be selected from all areas of chemistry, biochemistry or biology including the omics sciences (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics)."
CHEM 620 "Selected Topics in Organic Chemistry" "This course explores themes within the area of Organic Chemistry."
CHEM 621 "Physical Organic Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235; CHEM 324 or 325; or equivalent."
CHEM 623 "Organic Synthesis" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235, 324, or equivalent.  This course is concerned with synthetic strategy and design. It provides an introduction to advanced synthetic methods and reagents, involving heteroatoms such as sulphur, phosphorus, tin and selenium, as well as an overview of the uses of protecting groups in organic chemistry. The concept of retrosynthesis and a few asymmetric reactions are discussed using syntheses of natural products from the literature as examples. Lectures only."
CHEM 625 "Nucleic Acid Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 221, 222, 271, or equivalent.  This course introduces students to various topics in nucleic acid chemistry. The topics include nomenclature, structure and function of RNA and DNA; techniques and methods to investigate nucleic acid structure; DNA damage and repair; interaction of small molecules and proteins with nucleic acid; oligonucleotide-based therapeutics (antisense, antigene, RNAi); synthesis of purines, pyrimidines and nucleosides; and solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis. Lectures only."
CHEM 626 "Reactive Intermediates" "Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 325, or equivalent.  This course offers an introduction to reactive intermediates with an emphasis on structure and stability as found in modern (physical) organic chemistry. While the focus is on radicals and carbenes, carbocations are discussed near the end of the term. The material covered is relevant to chemistry and biochemistry. Lectures only."
CHEM 627 "Supramolecular Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 324 or 325; CHEM 335; or equivalent; or permission of the Department.  This course reviews some fundamental aspects of synthetic and biological supramolecular chemistry and nanotechnology. Topics covered may include supramolecular forces, ion binding and ion channels, molecular recognition, self-assembly (meso-scale and molecular-scale), organometallic supramolecular chemistry, dynamic combinatorial chemistry (DCC), and foldamers. Lectures only."
CHEM 630 "Selected Topics in Physical Chemistry" "This course explores themes within the area of Physical Chemistry."
CHEM 631 "Computational Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 241, 333, or equivalent; or permission of the Department.  This course presents the concepts, tools, and techniques of modern computational chemistry, and provides a very broad overview of the various fields of application across chemistry and biochemistry. The course is divided into two parts: 1) Molecular structure, which covers molecular mechanics and elementary electronic structure theory of atoms and molecules; and 2) Chemical reactivity, which covers applications of quantum chemistry and molecular dynamics techniques to studies of chemical reactions. The applications discussed include organic molecules and their reactions, peptides and proteins, drug design, DNA, polymers, inorganics, and materials. The course includes a practical component where students acquire hands-on experience with commonly used computational chemistry computer software. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 632 "Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234 or equivalent.  In this course, the basic concepts of classical (equilibrium) thermodynamics are first reviewed, followed by an introduction to statistical thermodynamics which gives a unified method of treating transport processes. At this point, the Boltzmann distribution function is derived, which leads to the statistical interpretation of entropy. Other important thermodynamic functions such as the partition function, the partition function for large ensembles and the Sackur-Tetrode equation are examined. The course also addresses non-equilibrium thermodynamics in the linear domain. The relations describing the production of entropy in irreversible processes due to heat transfer, charge transfer, change of volume, and chemical reactions are examined. The establishment of flux equations and the use of the Onsager reciprocal relations are then applied to the description of a variety of open systems. Lectures only."
CHEM 633 "Quantum Mechanics in Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 333, 431/631, or equivalent.  This course includes a thorough review of basic quantum mechanics in both the Schroedinger and Heisenberg representations, electronic structure theory, symmetry and group theory, interaction of matter with light, quantum scattering, the path integral formalism, quantum theories of chemical reaction rates, time-dependent approaches to spectroscopy, wave packet propagation, correlation functions and dynamics processes, and density matrices. Lectures only."
CHEM 635 "Interfacial Phenomena" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.  This course examines the physical chemistry of interfaces including surface and interfacial tensions, the absorption of surface active substances/surface excess properties, and surfactant self-assembly. Topics covered may include Gibbs and Langmuir monolayers, micelle formation, emulsions, foams, surfactant liquid crystals, layer-by-layer polymer self-assembly, and biological membranes. Techniques for characterization and applications (biological and industrial) of these systems are addressed. Lectures only."
CHEM 638 "Physics and Chemistry of Solid State Electronic Materials" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 333, or equivalent.  This course essentially explores how electrical conductivity is influenced by the nature of the chemical bonding in these solid-state materials. The course provides an introduction to solid-state structures and then goes on to explore band theory, the central model used to describe electrical conductivity in the following three categories of electronic materials: conductors, semiconductors, and insulators. Finally the course explores the extension of the band model to interpret electrical conductivity in molecular semiconductors and charge-transfer complexes. Lectures only."
CHEM 640 "Selected Topics in Inorganic Chemistry" "This course explores themes within the area of Inorganic Chemistry."
CHEM 643 "Organometallic Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 341, or equivalent.  This course covers the structure and properties of organometallic compounds, their main reactions and their application in catalysis and organic chemistry. Lectures only."
CHEM 644 "Physical Methods in Chemistry" "This course provides an in-depth evaluation of the different methods used in modern physical chemistry such as laser, microwave, FT-IR, electron spin resonance, nuclear magnetic resonance, x-ray photoelectron, x-ray diffraction and fluorescence, Auger eletron, Mssbauer, and gamma-ray spectroscopic analysis, as well as scanning probe microscopy and mass spectrometry. Lectures only."
CHEM 645 "Bioinorganic Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 241, 271, or equivalent.  Role of metals in biochemical systems. Essential trace elements, zinc enzymes, oxygen transport and storage, metalloproteins and biological electron transfer, structure-function relationships in heme enzymes, nitrogen fixation; model compounds for metalloproteins and metalloenzymes. Lectures only."
CHEM 646 "Industrial Catalysis" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.  Basic and recent concepts in catalysis are described with particular emphasis on heterogenous catalysis. The technical, economic and environmental aspects of industrial catalysis are covered. The processes to be studied are chosen from the petroleum industry, the natural gas and coal processing industry, and the production of thermoplastics and synthetic fibres. The course ends with a rapid survey of problems associated with the treatment of industrial pollutants and with catalytic converters. Lectures only."
CHEM 650 "Selected Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry" "This course explores themes within the area of Multidisciplinary Chemistry."
CHEM 651 "Nanochemistry" "Prerequisites: CHEM 217, 218, 221, 222, 234, 235, 241, or equivalent."
CHEM 658 "Aquatic Biogeochemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 217, 218, 312, or equivalent.  The major aim of this course is to present a quantitative treatment of the variables that determine the composition of natural waters. Chemical equilibrium is the central theme of the course, but consideration is also given to kinetics, steady-state and dynamic models. Related themes include global chemical cycles, air and water pollution, as well as current research topics in water chemistry and chemical oceanography. Lectures only."
CHEM 670 "Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics" "This course explores themes within the area of Biochemistry and Biophysics."
CHEM 676 "Structure and Function of Biomembranes" "Prerequisite: BIOL 266, CHEM 375, or equivalent.  Examples from the current literature are used to discuss what is known about how the membranes of biological organisms are assembled and the roles that these membranes play in a number of important processes. Emphasis is placed on the transport of proteins to and through biomembranes and the roles that membranes play in metabolite and ion transport. Where applicable, the significance of these processes is illustrated by examining the roles of membranes in health and disease. Lectures only."
CHEM 677 "Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism" "Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.  This course explores steady-state kinetics, including such topics as the use of initial velocity studies and product inhibition to establish a kinetic mechanism; nonsteady-state kinetics, isotope effects, energy of activation, and the detailed mechanisms of selected enzymes. Lectures only."
CHEM 678 "Protein Engineering and Design" "Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.  This course examines the principles behind protein design, how techniques of protein engineering are used, and the methods used to assess protein properties. Examples include studies of protein stability, structure-function relationships, and applications to drug design. Lectures only."
CHEM 690 "Selected Topics in Instrumentation" "This course explores themes within the area of Instrumentation."
CHEM 691 "Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 393, or equivalent.  This course is designed to provide the background in magnetic resonance theory necessary to understand modern high-resolution NMR experiments and instrumentation. The basic theory in the introductory section also applies to electron spin resonance (ESR). Relaxation and through-bond and through-space interactions, and experiments to investigate them are considered. Spin manipulations and behaviour in multiple-pulse, Fourier transform NMR techniques used for common spectral editing and two-dimensional experiments are discussed. Lectures only."
CHEM 692 "Experimental Protein Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 477 or equivalent or permission of the Department.  This hands on course introduces students to the common techniques used to study the structure and function of proteins and other macromolecules. Techniques covered include circular dichroism spectroscopy, fluorescence, UV/Vis spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, isothermal titration microcalorimetry, analytical ultracentrifugation, and protein crystallization/X-ray crystallography. The course includes theory, applications of the technique to the study of protein structure and function, and basic practice experiments to become familiar with the instrument and data analysis. For some of the techniques covered hands-on use will be limited. Each student is required to carry out a project on his/her own protein of interest. Each participant asks a specific question about a protein and then uses the techniques covered in the course to address the question. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 667 "PhD Literature/Topic Seminar" "CHEM 668 PhD Research Seminar"
ENCS 6001 "Elements of Engineering Mathematics" ""
ENCS 6021 "Engineering Analysis" "ENCS 6111 Numerical Methods"
ENCS 591 "Topics in Engineering and Computer Science" "ENCS 691 Topics in Engineering and Computer Science I"
ELEC 6041 "Large-scale Control Systems" "ELEC 6061 Real-time Computer Control Systems"
ENGR 6201 "Fluid Mechanics" "ENGR 6221 Microfluidic Systems"
ENGR 6191 "Introduction to Biomedical Engineering" "ENGR 6301 Advanced Dynamics"
ENGR 6151 "Continuum Mechanics" "ENGR 6501 Applied Elasticity"
BLDG 6951 "Solar Building Modelling and Design" "ENGR 6601 Principles of Solar Engineering"
ENCS 5721 "Composition and Argumentation for Engineers" "ENCS 6721 Technical Writing and Research Methods for Scientists and Engineers"
ENCS 6031 "Cultures of Engineering Practice" "ENCS 6041 Creativity, Innovation, and Critical Thinking"
ENGR 6411 "Robotic Manipulators I: Mechanics (*)" "ENGR 7401 Robotic Manipulators II: Control"
ENGR 6421 "Standards, Regulations and Certification" "ENGR 6441 Materials Engineering for Aerospace"
INDU 6111 "Theory of Operations Research" "INDU 6121Applied Optimization"
BLDG 6111 "Computer-Aided Building Operation" "BLDG 6151 Database Applications in Building and Civil Engineering"
BLDG 6601 "Building Enclosure" "BLDG 6611 Building Science"
BLDG 6701 "Building Environment" "BLDG 6711 Mechanical Systems in Building"
BLDG 6801 "Construction Planning and Control(*)" "BLDG 6811 Labour and Industrial Relations in Construction (*)"
BLDG 6061 "Structural Systems for Buildings" "BLDG 6071 Wind Engineering and Building Aerodynamics"
CIVI 6101 "Planning and Design of Bridges" "CIVI 7101 Theory and Design of Orthotropic Bridges"
CIVI 6301 "Hydrology (*)" "CIVI 6331 Hydraulic Engineering"
CIVI 6401 "Transportation Systems Analysis" "CIVI 6411 Urban Transportation Planning (*)"
CIVI 6501 "Foundation Engineering" "CIVI 6511 Earth Structures and Slope Stability"
CIVI 6481 "Sustainable Management of Industrial Waste" "CIVI 6491 Engineering Aspects of Site Remediation"
CIVI 6601 "Modelling in Building and Environmental Engineering" "CIVI 6611 Environmental Engineering"
ELEC 6111 "Detection and Estimation Theory" "ELEC 6131 Error Detecting and Correcting Codes"
ELEC 6221 "Solid State Devices (*)" "ELEC 6231 Design of Integrated Circuit Components (*)"
ELEC 6301 "Advanced Electromagnetics" "ELEC 6311 Radiation and Scattering of Waves"
ELEC 6411 "Power Electronics I (*)" "ELEC 6421 Renewable Energy Systems (*)"
ELEC 6601 "Digital Signal Processing" "ELEC 6611 Digital Filters"
COEN 6211 "Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology (*)" "COEN 6311 Software Engineering"
MECH 6011 "Analysis and Design of Pneumatic Systems" "MECH 6021 Design of Industrial Control Systems (*)"
MECH 6101 "Kinetic Theory of Gases" "MECH 6131 Conduction and Radiation Heat Transfer"
ENGR 6161 "Sensors and Actuators" "ENGR 6371 Micromechatronic Systems and Applications"
MECH 6511 "Mechanical Forming of Metals (*)" "MECH 6531 Casting"
MECH 6741 "Mechatronics (*)" "MECH 6751 Vehicle Dynamics (*)"
MECH 6501 "Advanced Materials" "MECH 6521 Manufacturing of Composites (*)"
BLDG 8011 "Doctoral Seminar in Building Engineering (***)" "CIVI 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Civil Engineering (***)"
ENCS 8501 "Comprehensive Examination " "ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal "
ENCS 6931 "Industrial Stage and Training" "ELEC 6961 Graduate Seminar in Electrical and Computer Engineering"
INSE 6311 "Sustainable Infrastructure Planning and Management Systems" "INSE 6400 Principles of Systems Engineering"
INSE 6510 "Video Game Technology and Development" "INSE 6530 3D Graphics and Computer Animation for Game Design"
INSE 6210 "Total Quality Methodologies in Engineering" "INSE 6220 Advanced Statistical Approaches to Quality"
INSE 6110 "Foundations of Cryptography" "INSE 6120 Crypto-Protocol and Network Security"
INSE 6100 "Advanced Java Platforms" "INSE 6320 Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering"
MBA 607 "Financial Accounting for Managerial Decisions" "MBA 608 Managerial Statistics"
COEN 6501 "Digital System Design and Synthesis" "COEN 6511 VLSI Circuit Design"
BCEE 6961 "Graduate Seminar in Building and Civil Engineering" "MEng students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Department and submit a comprehensive report on selected topics. The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 1000 words in length, must be type-written on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred toForm and Style: Thesis, Reports, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou,published by Houghton Mifflin."
BLDG 6061 "Structural Systems for Buildings" "Building components and assembled systems. Structural efficiency and economy: rigid frames, shear walls, framed tube, latticed structures; membrane, air and cable supported structures. Selection and preliminary design of building structural systems, materials and components. Case studies."
BLDG 6071 "Wind Engineering and Building Aerodynamics" "Atmospheric circulations; atmospheric boundary layer; wind structure; wind speed and turbulence measurements; bluff body aerodynamics; mean and fluctuating wind forces on buildings; internal wind pressures; along-wind, across-wind and torsional building response to wind; snow drifting and accumulation problems; dispersion of gaseous pollutants. A case study or a project is required."
BLDG 6111 "Computer-Aided Building Operation" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6711.  Computer systems for energy management, including scheduling and operation of HVAC systems and lighting. Applications for intelligent buildings. Use of simulation and knowledge-based software for automatic regulation of building operation. Diagnosis of malfunctions and modifications of operations. Computerized building security systems. Actions during extraordinary conditions such as fire emergencies. A project is required."
BLDG 6151 "Database Applications in Building and Civil Engineering" "Components, properties and limits of databases and database management systems (DBMS). Database requirements for engineering tasks. Design of database schema and implementation in commercially available DBMS. Engineering data modelling techniques. Topics include: the entity/relationship model; the relational data model; the standard database language SQL; and the object-oriented data model. A project is required."
BLDG 6221 "Design of Computer-Aided Systems in Building and Civil Engineering" "Object-oriented modelling of physical components, design objectives, performance requirements and engineering processes. Identification of objects and definition of their arrangement and interaction to model engineering processes. Overview of the life-cycle of an engineering software project. Project on implementation of a small scale computer-aided engineering system."
BLDG 6231 "Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Building and Civil Engineering" "Introduction to artificial intelligence techniques in an engineering context; heuristic search methods, logical reasoning, knowledge-based systems, neural networks, genetics algorithms, and case-based reasoning. Algorithmic versus knowledge-based programming for engineering applications. Emphasis on knowledge-based systems and their characteristics, capabilities and limitations. Case studies in design, failure diagnosis and processing of standards. A project is required."
BLDG 6241 "Building Information Modelling in Construction" "Topics include introduction to Building Information Modelling (BIM) technologies; BIM implementation at different project stages - pre-construction, construction, and facility management; BIM-Aided design alternatives, constructability analysis, and development of space-time-cost models; BIM visualization for trade coordination and processes monitoring. A project is required."
BLDG 6541 "Heat Transfer" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program)."
BLDG 6561 "Building Economics I (*)" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program)."
BLDG 6571 "Project Management" "Introduction to managing the development, design and construction of buildings. Examination of project management for the total development process, including inter-relationships between owners, developers, financing sources, designers, contractors and users; methods of project delivery; introduction to planning and scheduling; role and tasks of the project manager; feasibility analyses; construction claims; financing and cash-flow analysis; government regulations; environmental and social constraints; introduction to control of cost, time and technical performance; human factors; computer applications. A project is required."
BLDG 6581 "Decision Analysis" "Development of a basic theory of decision making under uncertainty. Rationales of decision makers, utility, the concept of the value of perfect information. The Bayesian approach to decision making; pre-posterior analysis and optimal fixed-sized analysis for random processes. Decision analysis with multiple objective, structuring the problem, multi-attributed utility functions, case studies. A project is required."
BLDG 6591 "Computer-Aided Building Design (*)" "Prerequisites:BLDG 6561."
BLDG 6601 "Building Enclosure" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
BLDG 6611 "Building Science" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program)."
BLDG 6621 "Modern Building Materials (*)" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
BLDG 6631 "Fundamentals of Facility Management" "Systems approach to planning, organization and implementation of a facility, including space allocation, leasing and marketing, operation, maintenance, and renovation over the life of the building. Forecast of budget requirements for effective operation, maintenance, and renovation. Correlation between the operation of the building and health risks, comfort, productivity, and costs. Integrated approach to the planning, analysis, evaluation, organization and optimization of physical systems of facilities. Case studies."
BLDG 6641 "Industrialized Building" "Trends toward off-site fabrication of buildings. Needs and technical requirements of international markets. Principal types of industrialized systems, materials and components. Optimization of industrialized production. Planning, design, construction and maintenance. Codes and standards. A case study and project."
BLDG 6651 "Fire and Smoke Control in Buildings(*)" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
BLDG 6661 "Hydrothermal Performance of the Building Envelope" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.  Modelling of dynamic building envelope thermal performance. Thermal bridges. Modelling of transient moisture transfer, condensation and accumulation. Advanced glazings and evaluation of window performance. Active building envelope components for heat and moisture control. Experimental techniques for performance evaluation of the building envelope; infrared thermography, guarded hot box and calibrated hot box tests. A project is required."
BLDG 6671 "Diagnostics and Rehabilitation of Building Envelope" "Failures in building envelopes. Modes of deterioration including freeze-thaw, chemical, movements. Diagnostics and investigation techniques including field survey instruments. Assessment of intervention magnitude and performance of proposed solutions. Codes, standards and regulations. Case studies."
BLDG 6701 "Building Environment" "Design criteria of indoor environment. Assessment of thermal comfort and sensation. Mathematical models of thermal comfort: predictive models and adaptive models. Prediction of thermal sensation using: computer simulation, and measurements with thermal comfort meter. Verification of compliance with standards. Visual comfort. Standards for quality of visual environment. Calculation of photometric parameters. Preliminary design of the indoor lighting system. Evaluation of illuminance level using commercially available software packages. Acoustical comfort. Standards for quality of acoustical environment. Sound control measures through the design of buildings and HVAC systems. Two projects."
BLDG 6711 "Mechanical Systems in Building" "Co-requisite:BLDG 6701."
BLDG 6721 "Building Acoustics(*)" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
BLDG 6731 "Building Illumination (*)" "Quantitative and qualitative aspects of illumination systems. Photometric quantities, visual perception and colour theory, standards, daylight and artificial illumination systems, radiative transfer. Fixture and lamp characteristics, control devices for improved energy efficiency. Design of advanced fenestration systems for daylighting. Field measurements and artificial sky tests. Virtual reality and other computer simulation techniques for lighting. A project is required."
BLDG 6741 "HVAC Control Systems" "HVAC control loops: classification and structure, specifications, hardware, tuning and testing. Optimization of single- and multi-loop control systems. Energy management systems for monitoring, control and diagnostics of HVAC system operation. A project is required."
BLDG 6751 "Indoor Air Quality and Ventilation (*)" "History and development of indoor air science. Relevant national and provincial standards and regulations. Principles of occupational hygiene; identification, evaluation and control of physical, biological, and chemical agents in indoor environment. Ventilation requirements. Definition of ventilation efficiency and removal effectiveness; measurement techniques and modelling. Indoor air monitoring; field studies of gases, fumes, solvents, and dusts. Plan for building walkthrough evaluations; strategies for improving indoor air quality. Building design for acceptable indoor air quality, material selection and specification. A case study or project."
BLDG 6761 "Intelligent Buildings" "Issues related to the Intelligent Building; automation, communication and security. Mechanical, electrical, electronic subsystems and their integration within the building; configuration and operational characteristics; performance specifications; analytical models; design methods; case studies. A project is required."
BLDG 6781 "Energy Management in Buildings" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.  Energy-related standards, codes and by-laws. Methods of assessment of the actual energy performance. Conventional and innovative measurement and analysis techniques. Energy-oriented renovation or replacement of building sub-systems (e.g. HVAC and lighting systems). Prediction of energy and cost savings using commercially available software packages. Verification of compliance with standards. Life cycle analysis. A case study and project."
BLDG 6791 "Thermal Building Simulation" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6611.  Mathematical models of heat and mass transfer phenomena through building components: transfer function methods and numerical methods. Models of radiative and convective heat transfer phenomena within buildings. Application to equipment-based modelling of HVAC systems: first principle models and correlation-based models. System-based modelling of HVAC systems. Validation of computer models. A project is required."
BLDG 6801 "Construction Planning and Control(*)" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6571.  Methods of delivering construction. Contractual relationships and organizational structures. Phases of project development. Estimating resource requirements; costs and durations. Bidding strategies. Network analysis using CPM and PERT, time-cost trade-off, resource allocation. Cash flow analysis. Earned-value concept for integrated time and cost control. Quality control. Value engineering. A case study and project."
BLDG 6811 "Labour and Industrial Relations in Construction(*)" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
BLDG 6821 "Legal Issues in Construction(*)" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
BLDG 6831 "Construction Processes(*)" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
BLDG 6851 "Project Cost Estimating(*)" "Techniques and procedures used for estimating cost of construction projects. Topics include: cost estimation process; elements of project cost; conceptual and detailed cost estimation methods; risk assessment and range estimating; case studies; computer-aided estimating. A project is required."
BLDG 6861 "Simulations and Design of Construction Operations" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6831.  Principles of modelling and simulation. Classification and validation of simulation models. Analysis of input data and outputs. Object Oriented Simulation (OOS). Simulation languages. Application of discrete event simulation in construction operations including earthmoving operations, building construction operations, and tunneling operations. A project is required."
BLDG 691 "Topics in Building Engineering I" "Note:Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc."
BLDG 6921 "Trenchless Technology for Rehabilitation Works" "State of Canadian urban infrastructure with a focus on underground facilities; current industry practice; common types of defects in underground pipes; diagnostics of defects and evaluation techniques for the conditions of water and sewer mains; planning, equipment, materials and methods for rehabilitation of water and sewer mains; case studies."
BLDG 6931 "Infrastructure Rehabilitation" "State of Canadian urban infrastructure. Rehabilitation techniques as applicable to steel and concrete structures; degradation mechanisms; detection and classification of defects. Evaluation and assessment of the conditions of buildings and bridges. Rehabilitation materials and methods. Codes and guidelines. Case studies."
BLDG 6951 "Solar Building Modelling and Design" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6611 or permission of instructor.  Design principles of solar buildings, including direct gain, indirect gain and solaria. Net-zero energy solar buildings; analytical and numerical models. Performance of glazing systems, transparent insulation, and airflow windows. Building-integrated photovoltaic systems. Thermal storage sizing for solar energy storage; phase-change thermal storage. Thermosyphon collectors. Prevention of overheating, shading systems and natural ventilation. A project is required."
BLDG 7401 "Dispersion of Building Exhaust" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6611.  Atmospheric parameters, wind velocity profiles, meteorological data. Gaussian dispersion equations. Plume rise and trajectories. Evaluation of stack gas plume dispersion. Trapped plumes; Turners approximation. Potential reingestion of building exhaust. Analytical, numerical and experimental modelling of dispersion process; design guidelines fumigation. A case study or a project is required."
BLDG 7511 "Integrated Building Design" "Prerequisites:BLDG 6601 and BLDG 6711."
BLDG 7521 "Advanced Computer-Aided Building Design" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6231.  Characteristics of the building design process. Traditional versus emerging roles of computers pertaining to building design activities. Preliminary design and integrated design issues: analysis with incomplete/imprecise data, automatic sizing and checking based on Standards, interfaces between CAD and analysis routines, communications across disciplines and through design stages, standardization. Applications involving operations research techniques, KBS and analysis packages for engineering performance evaluation. A project is required."
BLDG 7601 "Durability of Building Materials" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6611 or equivalent.  Concepts underlying long-term performance of building materials such as: ceramics, stucco and synthetic stucco, lightweight concrete, wood and wood-based products, thermal insulation, selected composite materials, sealants, membranes used for waterproofing and air barriers. Methods of fabrication, properties and evaluation for durability. Failure mechanisms under combined actions of mechanical and environmental loads (temperature, moisture, freeze-thaw, solar radiation, salt solutions, air pollution, and microorganisms). A case study and project."
BLDG 7811 "Project Acquisition and Control" "Prerequisites:BLDG 6571, 6801."
BLDG 7831 "Building Economics II" "Prerequisites:BLDG 6561, 6581."
BLDG 7841 "Information Technology Applications in Construction" "Prerequisite:BLDG 7811.  Use of computers in estimating, cost engineering, scheduling and resource analyses, materials control, report generation and operations simulation. Information systems: information-based theories of management; information technology, cost and value information; analysis, design and implementation of a network based control system. Considerations for computer usage in construction firms; hardware, software, operations, economic, human and organizational. Product and process modelling; Internet use in product delivery. A project is required."
BLDG 7861 "Business Practices in Construction" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6801.  A study of business practices as they relate to the construction industry. Topics treated include: organization; marketing; bid preparation; bonding; personnel management; financing; accounting; cash-flow analysis; capital budgeting. The principles are first presented and then followed by case studies. A project is required."
BLDG 7871 "Construction Equipment Management" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6561.  The study of various classes of equipment, (cranes, excavators, loaders, tractors, etc.) used in construction. Methods are developed for selecting, acquiring, maintaining and replacing equipment. Treatment of simulation and its use for the optimal selection of equipment spreads. A project is required."
BLDG 791 "Topics in Building Engineering II" "Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc."
BLDG 8011 "Doctoral Seminar in Building Engineering (***)" "Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value."
CIVI 6001 "Advanced Reinforced Concrete" "Strength limits; modes of failure; flexural and inclined cracking strength; crack propagation; crack width; deformation; biaxial and multiaxial strength of concrete; ultimate strength in flexure; ultimate strength in diagonal splitting; ultimate strength of columns; current research progress and modelling for finite element analysis; new code regulations. A project is required."
CIVI 6011 "Pre-cast and Pre-stressed Concrete Structures" "Prefabrication and prestressing concepts; segmental and modular structures and connections; composite and pre-and post-tensioned structures; analysis and design of determinate and indeterminate systems; design codes. A project is required."
CIVI 6021 "Durability of Concrete Materials" "Influence of constituent materials (cements, aggregates and admixtures) on the properties of fresh and hardened concrete. Chemistry and hydration reactions of cement and alternate cementing materials. Development of pore structure and its influence on transport and deterioration mechanisms, durability testing. Concrete mixture design and optimization for high performance and other speciality concrete types. Climatic loads affecting durability and performance. Performance vs. prescriptive specifications. A project is required."
CIVI 6031 "Seismic Assessment and Retrofit of Structures" "Seismic rehabilitation requirements and performance objectives. Evolution of codes, standards and regulations. Selection of retrofit design methodology. General strategies to develop rehabilitation schemes: add stiffness, damping, and/or mass reduction. Seismic assessment of existing steel structures. Behaviour and design of structures equipped with energy dissipation devices. Case studies and a project are required."
CIVI 6051 "Design of Industrial Structures" "Problems in the design of industrial structures in steel, reinforced concrete, masonry, and timber; rejuvenation and expansion of existing plant facilities; design of bracing systems, foundations, silos and liquid storage tanks; connections, standard details and codes. A case study and project."
CIVI 6061 "Structural Health Monitoring" "Review of the current state of infrastructure including bridges, dams, pipelines as well as buildings. Components of civil infrastructure including smart and innovative structures. Structural Health Monitoring (SHM): principles, techniques, implementation, interdisciplinary approach, advantages and challenges. SHM systems: component and system design, sensors and instrumentation, data acquisition, data management, interpretation of SHM data, assessment of structural condition, and decision making. Damage detection methods: local and global, analytical and experimental, non-destructive evaluation, vibration based damage identification. Field applications. A project is required."
CIVI 6071 "Advanced Steel Structures Design" "Topics of this course include design principles ofductile buildingstructures; fundamentals of stability theory, frame stability; concept, methods and applications of plastic analysis; design for local and global stability of braced frames, moment-resisting frames and structures equipped with passive supplemental damping systems: hysteretic, yielding and self-centring dampers; design strategies for enhanced seismic stability; computer applications. A project is required."
CIVI 6101 "Planning and Design of Bridges" "History and development of bridges; basic parameters; material, system and geometry; selection of location and optimum proportioning of different structural types; selection and design of steel and concrete highway and railway bridge structures based on requirements of economics; maintenance, aesthetics and safety; modern trends in bridge design and construction; analysis of existing bridges; numerical examples. A project is required."
CIVI 6301 "Hydrology(*)" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
CIVI 6331 "Hydraulic Engineering" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
CIVI 6381 "Hydraulic Structures" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
CIVI 6401 "Transportation Systems Analysis" "Aspects of probability and statistics as applied to transportation; network theory; system operations and safety management; applications of optimization and decision theory to selection of alternative systems and facility location; evaluation of traffic control devices; signal timing plans and management strategies. A project is required."
CIVI 6411 "Urban Transportation Planning(*)" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
CIVI 6441 "Traffic Engineering" "(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent)."
CIVI 6451 "Pavement Design" "Components of pavement systems; materials, tests and specifications; granular and treated bases, subgrade and drainage; earthwork and soil stabilization; mechanistic-empirical theory for pavements; damage accumulation; axle loads and stresses in pavements; design methods for flexible and rigid pavements of highways and airports; design of pavement overlays; economic requirements; design projects and computer applications. A project is required."
CIVI 6461 "Pavement Management Systems" "Topics include introduction to pavement systems; strategic, tactical and operational planning for sustainable pavements; preservation, rehabilitation, upgrading and expansion; pavement damage assessment; data collection; decision making; performance modelling; pavement deterioration; coordination and scheduling of interventions. A project is required."
CIVI 6481 "Sustainable Management of Industrial Waste" "Industrial ecology and sustainable engineering concepts, characterization and sources of industrial waste, toxicological and risk aspects of waste management; environmental impact, material flow analysis, energy balance and recovery, management of water and resources use, material minimization, storage, physical, chemical and biological transformations, recycling, reuse and disposal, life cycle assessment, regulations, ISO certification. A project is required."
CIVI 6491 "Engineering Aspects of Site Remediation" "Physico-chemical characteristics of subsurface; soil biology; introduction to subsurface transport of contaminants; site assessment techniques; bioremediation principles and techniques; physico-chemical remediation; thermal removal; in-situ and ex-situ groundwater techniques; natural attenuation; case studies; lab demonstrations. A project is required."
CIVI 6501 "Foundation Engineering" "Theoretical development of bearing capacity of shallow and deep foundations, settlement analyses, design of retaining walls, sheet piles, tiebacks and caissons, dynamic analyses of pile foundations, design of machine foundations, foundations on difficult soils, construction and performance of foundations, computer applications, case histories. A project is required."
CIVI 6511 "Earth Structures and Slope Stability" "Design and construction of earth and rockfill dams. Seepage problems, flow nets, seepage control, soil compaction and stabilization. Computer analysis of slope stability, factor of safety. Measures taken to limit and accommodate settlements. Case studies."
CIVI 6521 "Soil Behaviour" "Drained and undrained shear strength of soils, stress-strain relationships, two and three dimensional stress paths. Pore water pressure coefficients in saturated and partially saturated clays. One and three dimensional consolidation theories, design of sand drains, and applications. Special geotechnical problems. A project is required."
CIVI 6531 "Soil Testing and Properties" "Measurement and evaluation of soil consolidation, strength, and pore water pressure characteristics by means of consolidation, triaxial and direct shear tests. Application of test results to design and research problems. A project is required."
CIVI 6541 "Reinforced Earth" "Design of geotechnical structures reinforced with geotextiles and geogrids to improve their strength and deformation properties. Use of geonets and geomembranes to accelerate the drainage and consolidation of soil systems. Soil nailing and inclined piling to prevent downhill creep and slope failure. Analysis and design of stone columns used to support light structures and prevent instability due to soil liquefaction. A project is required."
CIVI 6601 "Modelling in Building and Environmental Engineering" "Continuous and discrete forms of conservation laws: mass, momentum and energy, numerical methods (finite differences, implicit and explicit schemes, finite elements). Transport of contaminants and moisture in buildings and contaminants in the environment. Modelling and measuring sources and sinks of pollutants. Computer applications to building and environmental engineering. A case study and project."
CIVI 6611 "Environmental Engineering" "Introduction to waste water treatment and control; stream pollution and control; ground water pollution; air pollution; acid rain, meteorological aspects. Noise pollution; hazardous waste disposal; solid waste management. A case study and a project are required."
CIVI 6621 "Engineering Aspects of Biological Treatment of Water and Air" "Introduction to aerobic/anaerobic microbial processes, design of aerobic and anaerobic systems for biological treatment of municipal, industrial and agricultural water and air pollution, design and modelling of activated sludge reactors, trickling filters, plug flow reactors, lagoons, nutrient removal, constructed wetlands, phytoremediation, biofilters, bioscrubbers, management of biosolids, lab demonstration. A case study and project."
CIVI 6631 "Hazardous Material Management and Transportation" "Characterization and sources of hazardous materials, accidental release of hazardous material, toxicological aspects of hazardous material; risk analysis, legal issues, management of hazardous material after catastrophic events, storage, treatments, recycling, reuse and exchange of hazardous materials, life cycle analysis, attenuation of accidental release of hazardous materials, transportation and environmental systems interface, transportation network, minimum-risk route models, determination of safe truck routes and management. A project is required."
CIVI 6641 "Unit Operations in Environmental Engineering" "Physical and chemical principles underlying coagulation, flocculation, sedimentation, sorption, reverse osmosis, electrodialysis, ion exchange and sludge dewatering. Design and scale-up equations for clarifiers, absorption columns, filters, centrifuges, electrodialysis stacks, air components and demineralization units, lab demonstration. A case study and a project are required."
CIVI 6651 "Water Pollution and Control" "Physical, chemical and biological characteristics of water, water quality standards, reaction kinetics and material balances, eutrophication. Containment of reactive contaminants. Natural purification processes in water system, adsorption, absorption; diffusion and dispersion, oxidation. Large-scale transport of contaminants, single and multiple source models; modelling of transport processes, computer simulation, introduction to groundwater pollution, sea-water intrusion. A case study and a project are required."
CIVI 6661 "Environmental Impact Assessment (*)" "Engineering activities and the environment; environmental ethics. Prediction and estimation, statistical analysis of impact on air, water, soil quality and biological, socio-economic, cultural environments. Water and air pollution law, solid and hazardous waste laws. Applications of GIS, Environmental inventories, assessment preparation and review. Federal and provincial laws and regulations on environmental assessment. Strategies for environmental compliance, resolution of environmental conflicts. Case studies and project."
CIVI 6671 "Fate and Transport of Contaminants in the Environment" "Physical and chemical properties of organic and inorganic contaminants, air-soil-water-cycle and contaminant interactions, adsorption/desorption models, soil components in contaminant transport, influence of groundwater composition, advective flow, diffusion transport, diffusion and dispersion coefficients, partition coefficients, mechanisms and modelling of contaminant transport in soil and groundwater, environmental fate of contaminants Case studies concerning landfills, greenhouse effects, soil and groundwater interactions, nuclear waste disposal. A project is required."
CIVI 6681 "Environmental Nanotechnology" "Topics include basic concepts of nanoscience and nanotechnology; characterization of nanomaterials; nanoscience and public policy aspects; nanoparticle transport and fate in the environment; nanohazard assessment and nanotoxicology; environmental engineering applications of nanotechnology: pollutants sensing, monitoring, control and remediation. A project is required."
CIVI 6691 "Greenhouse Gases and Control" "Topics include physiochemical characteristics of greenhouse gas (GHG) species; GHG emissions, inventories, quantification and management; international and regional standards, protocols, regulations and schemes; GHG information management systems; GHG reuse, recycling, and sequestration; GHG emissions modelling and control planning; available and emerging technologies for reducing GHG emissions. A project is required."
CIVI 6711 "Asset Management for Sustainable Civil Infrastructure" "Topics include fundamentals of the infrastructure asset management process; strategic planning, location of underground assets, condition assessment and performance indicators, deterioration models, and development of community driven levels of service; life-cycle analysis, integrated infrastructure modelling, optimized intervention plans and budget allocation, asset management software systems. A project is required."
CIVI 691 "Topics in Civil Engineering I" "Note:Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number. e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc."
CIVI 7001 "Earthquake Engineering" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6581.  Earthquake ground motion characteristics; behaviour of buildings, bridges, etc., methods and principles of structural dynamics; inelastic action and concept of energy absorption; evaluation of damage; soil structure interaction problems; design methods and code requirements; current research. A project is required."
CIVI 7031 "Dynamics of Foundations" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6581.  Principles of soil dynamics; dynamic loads, theory of vibrations and design considerations for foundations of different types; shallow foundations, deep foundations, massive machine bases; problems of soil-structure interaction. A project is required."
CIVI 7101 "Theory and Design of Orthotropic Bridges" "Prerequisite:CIVI 6101.  Natural and technical orthotropy; orthogonally stiffened plates; methods of bridge analysis and design; materials; specifications; analysis of existing orthotropic structures; numerical examples. A project is required."
CIVI 7111 "Theory and Design of Modern Bridge Systems" "Prerequisite:CIVI 6101.  Hybrid, post-stressed and composite plate girders and trusses; delta type girders; orthotropic, shell types and tubular bridges, cable-stayed and stiffened cable bridges; optimization of bridge systems; vibrations and damping capacity; aerodynamics and seismic stability; concept of safety; fatigue and carrying capacity; use of models; application of computers. A project is required."
CIVI 7121 "Cable Stayed Bridges" "Prerequisite:CIVI 6101.  Basic bridge systems; methods of structural analysis; aerodynamic stability; structural details; typical structures. A project is required."
CIVI 7311 "Advanced Analysis of Groundwater Flow and Contamination" "Prerequisite:ENCS 6021.  Groundwater storage and supply; storage in confined aquifers; water table fluctuation; aquifers; steady groundwater hydraulics; aquifer tests and pumping. Groundwater flow equations; conservative and reactive contaminant transport of groundwater systems; analytical and numerical solutions of contaminant transport equations; flow and solute transport in fractured porous media; assessment of environmental impact of waste disposal operations, model implementation strategies. A project is required."
CIVI 7401 "Design of Transportation Terminals" "Prerequisites:CIVI 6401 or 6411."
CIVI 7901 "Environmental Engineering Research Project" "Prerequisite:Completion of at least 20 credits in the Environmental Engineering program and permission of the Departmental Graduate Program Director.  This is a research project to be completed under the supervision of a full-time faculty member from the Department. The research topic must be in the field of environmental engineering, and should be selected in consultation and with the approval of a faculty supervisor. The course is graded on the basis of the students performance during the work period, which includes a technical report that is assessed by two faculty members in the area."
CIVI 791 "Topics in Civil Engineering II" "Note:Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number. e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc."
CIVI 8011 "Doctoral Seminar in Civil Engineering (***)" "Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value."
CHME 6001 "Project in Chemical and Materials Engineering" "The course consists of an individual project in a chosen area of study in the area of Chemical and Materials Engineering under the supervision of a faculty member. This course may be repeated for credit."
CHME 6011 "Advanced Transport Phenomena" "Topics include equations of heat, mass, and momentum transfer; viscosity, thermal conductivity and diffusivity in laminar and turbulent conditions; velocity, temperature, and concentration distributions in selected systems; Navier-Stokes equations: direct simulation and turbulence modelling  Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS); turbulence near surfaces and interphase transport; multicomponent mass transfer; transport in porous media; effects of narrow pore size; and the dusty-gas model (DGM). A project is required."
CHME 6021 "Advanced Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics" "Topics include principles, concepts, and laws/postulates of classical and statistical thermodynamics and their link to applications that require quantitative knowledge of thermodynamic properties from a macroscopic to a molecular level; basic postulates of classical thermodynamics and their application; criteria of stability and equilibria; constitutive property models of pure materials and mixtures, including molecular-level effects using statistical mechanics; equations of state; phase and chemical equilibria of multicomponent systems; and thermodynamics of polymers. Applications are emphasized through extensive problem work relating to practical cases. A project is required."
CHME 6031 "Chemical Kinetics and Reaction Engineering" "CHME 6041 Chemical Engineering Process Dynamics and Control(4 credits)"
CHME 6051 "Chemical Process Engineering and Design" "Topics include a review of the concepts of industrial chemical process design, engineering economics, process optimization, process simulation and plant safety; the use of fundamental knowledge in science and mathematics to design practical chemical engineering facilities. Special emphasis is placed on safety, hazards, sustainability and loss prevention issues in chemical plants. A project is required."
CHME 6061 "Advanced Biochemical Engineering" "Topics include the interaction of chemical engineering, biochemistry, and microbiology; mathematical representations of microbial systems. Kinetics of growth, death, and metabolism are also covered, as well as studies of continuous fermentation, agitation, mass transfer, and scale-up in fermentation systems, and enzyme technology. A project is required."
CHME 6071 "Materials Science and Engineering" "Topics include structure, behaviour and properties of engineering materials  metals, ceramics, polymers and composites; effects of crystalline structure and imperfections; and methods of observing, measuring and interpreting properties of materials. A project is required."
CHME 6081 "Advanced Separation Processes" "Topics include a review of basic chemical and mechanical separations; multicomponent separations; membrane separations; adsorption; chromatographic separations; and ion exchange. A project is required."
CHME 6091 "Statistics for Chemical Engineering" "Topics include a review of basic statistics; hypothesis testing; multivariate statistics; linear and nonlinear regression; chemical process model calibration; and response surface methodology. A project is required."
CHME 6101 "Advanced Battery Materials and Technologies" "Topics include a review of the principles of batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors; electrodes and electrolytes; thermodynamics, reaction kinetics, transport phenomena, electrostatics and phase transformations of various energy storage materials, particularly lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells; and experimental methods to study key parameters of energy storage materials, focusing on a materials science approach. A project is required."
CHME 6111 "Polymer Chemistry and Engineering" "Topics include the advanced theory and industrial practice of polymers, polymer chemistry, and polymer reactor engineering. The course covers polymer chemistry and polymerization kinetics for various types of polymerization including condensation, free radical, cationic, anionic, and coordination polymerization; polymerization processes including bulk, solution, emulsion, dispersion, gas phase, and slurry processes; polymer reactor engineering, polymer materials structure and property characterization, and recent developments in the field are included. A project is required."
CHME 6121 "Nanomaterials Science and Engineering" "Topics include chemical and engineering aspects of nanomaterials. The course covers synthesis, characterization, properties, and applications of a variety of nanomaterials, with a focus on representative inorganic nanomaterials, as well as carbon nanomaterials such as fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, and graphene. A project is required."
CHME 6131 "Advanced Colloid and Interface Science and Engineering" "Topics include properties of colloids and surfactants; physical and chemical interactions between colloidal particles: attraction and repulsion; stability of colloidal dispersions; coagulation and flocculation; surface and interface tension - wettability; characterization methods of colloidal particles; the relation between interface energy and adsorption; adsorption of surfactants on interfaces; micelles; surfactants in nanotechnology; adsorption in porous media; and surface characterization methods. A project is required."
CHME 6911 "Topics in Chemical Engineering I" "Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the title of the topic. A project is required."
CHME 7911 "Topics in Chemical Engineering II" "Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the title of the topic. A project is required."
COEN 6211 "Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology (*)" "Introduction to the cell and the genome. Foundations of synthetic biology and ethics. Synthetic genomes and metabolic engineering. Model organisms, such as E. coli bacteria, and synthetic cells: self-replicating cells man-made from cloned genes, a cellular membrane and the basic elements of RNA and protein synthesis. Designing computational devices for implementation in biological cells. Introduction to modelling and computer simulation of gene regulatory networks. Methods of building and testing gene regulatory networks within and without cells. Expanding functionality via inter-cellular signaling. Basic interfacing to electronic sensors and actuators. Landmark and interesting applications of synthetic biology in computer engineering and other disciplines. A project is required."
COEN 6311 "Software Engineering" "Software life cycle, software requirements and requirement documentation. Software design: top-down and bottom-up approaches; design validation and design reviews. Software implementation, choice of a programming language and portability. Testing, debugging and verification. Design of test cases. Software documentation and its maintenance. Documentation tools and documentation portability, user interface design. A project is required."
COEN 6312 "Model-Driven Software Engineering" "Prerequisite:COEN 6311 or COMP 6471 or equivalent.  Model-Driven Architecture (MDA), domain-based system partitioning, Platform-Independent Modelling (PIM), Platform Specific Modelling (PSM), Unified Modelling Language (UML), static and dynamic modelling with UML, UML extension mechanisms, UML profiling, Object Constraint Language (OCL), model transformation, introduction to Query/View/Transformation standard, action specification (OAL), automatic system generation. A project is required."
COEN 6313 "Programming on the Cloud (*)" "Prerequisite:COEN 6311.  Topics include definition(s) of principles of cloud-based problem solving and programming; autonomy of cloud computing, service and business models, data centres and virtualization; CAP theorem, REST API and data models; MapReduce and programming model, distributed file systems for computer clusters, development environments and tools on clouds; cloud-based access and query; cloud application design principles; applications of cloud service concepts to the design of a real-world Internet service. A project is required."
COEN 6331 "Neural Networks" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6131.  Fundamentals of artificial neural networks; rigorous analysis of and introduction to various network paradigms: perceptrons, backpropagation, counter-propagation, Hopfield nets, bi-directional associative memories, adaptive resonance theory, cognitron and neocognitron; neural network topologies, memories, learning, stability and convergence; applications to adaptive knowledge, knowledge processing, classification, pattern recognition, signal processing, communications, robotics and control; and assessment of current neural network technology. A project is required."
COEN 6341 "Embedded System Modelling" "Fundamental issues and state-of-the-art methods, tools and techniques for system-level design of heterogeneous multi-core embedded systems. Modelling at different levels, from abstract specification down to implementation across hardware-software boundaries. Embedded system specification using system-level design languages, SystemC and SpecC. Application modelling and analysis. Embedded multi-core platforms. Transaction-level platform modelling. Processor and RTOS modelling. Communication architecture modelling. A project is required."
COEN 6501 "Digital System Design and Synthesis" "This course introduces students to VHDL language and modelling digital circuit with VHDL. Topics include: arithmetic and logic circuits. Storage devices. Finite State Machines. Algorithmic State Machines. Timing issues. Asynchronous Design. VHDL and modelling with VHDL. Synthesis and architectural models for synthesis. Project involving system design and modelling. A project is required."
COEN 6511 "VLSI Circuit Design" "Physical design of digital circuits using technologies of Very Large Scale Integration. CMOS and BiCMOS logic blocks. CMOS processing technology, design rules, CAD issues, and limitation of CMOS technologies. Physical layouts and parasitic elements of CMOS circuits. Characterization and performance evaluation. Electrical simulation using HSPICE. Design and implementation of CMOS logic structures, interconnects, and I/O structures, emphasis on optimizing operation speed and/or power dissipation/distribution. Project of circuit design using a specified CMOS technology. A project is required."
COEN 6521 "Design for Testability" "Prerequisite:COEN 6501 or COEN 6511.  Stuck-at faults, observability, controllability, fault coverage, test vectors, automatic test pattern generation (ATPG), statistical fault analysis, ad-hoc testing, level sensitive scan design (LSSD), serial scan, parallel scan, signature analysis and BILBO, boundary scan, built-in-self-test (BIST), IDDQ testing. A project is required."
COEN 6531 "ASIC Synthesis" "Prerequisite:COEN 6501 or COEN 6511.  Introduction to high level synthesis; synthesis models. The synthesis process; High Level Description Languages; scheduling; chaining and pipelining; clock optimization and synthesis; I/O synthesis. Behavioral synthesis; architectural trade-offs in power, area and delay. Design flow with FPGAs; design flow with full-custom and semi-custom ASICs. A project is required."
COEN 6541 "Functional Hardware Verification (*)" "Prerequisite:COEN 6501 or equivalent.  Review of hardware design languages. Definition of functional verification. Design for verification. Writing testbenches, simulation engines, and coverage metrics. Introduction to verification languages. Verification plan: strategies, testcases, testbenches. Modelling verification environments. Modelling input relations, intervals, events. Introduction to formal verification tools. A project is required."
COEN 6551 "Formal Hardware Verification" "Prerequisite:COEN 6501.  Design verification technology. Introduction to mathematical logic (propositional, first-order, higher-order). Formal methods. Formal specification and validation. Combinational equivalence checking. Binary decision diagrams: BDD, automata theory, sequential equivalence checking, model theory, temporal logics, model checking, proof theory, predicate logic, theorem proving, formal verification CAD tools. Practical case studies. A project is required."
COEN 6611 "Real-time Systems" "Taxonomy of real-time systems; Scheduling algorithms for static and dynamic tasks; Fault-tolerance and reliability; Resource and resource access control; Multiprocessor scheduling, resource access control, and synchronization; Real-time communication, Case studies in distributed real-time systems (e.g., HARTS, MARS, Spring, etc.). A project is required."
COEN 6711 "Microprocessors and Their Applications" "Introduction to microprocessors and their architectures. Examples of various microprocessors. Bus and I/O Organizations. Addressing modes. Timing. Software related issues. Memory and its hierarchy. Static and dynamic memory interfacing. Synchronous and asynchronous interfacing. Interrupts. DMA. Use of Co-processors. Single chip Micro-controllers. Examples of microprocessor applications at the system level. A project is required."
COEN 6721 "Fault-Tolerant Distributed Systems" "Fundamentals of the design and analysis of fault-tolerant systems, Models for distributed systems, Fault/error models, Techniques for providing hardware/software redundancy, Fault-detection in multi-processors, Stable storage, Recovery strategies for multi-processors (checkpointing), System diagnosis, Software design faults, Experimental validation techniques, Case studies in fault-tolerant distributed systems. A project is required."
COEN 6741 "Computer Architecture and Design" "Review of basic computer architecture designs. Fundamentals of computer design and performance. Cost issues. Instruction set design principles. Memory hierarchies: registers, caches and virtual memories. Basic processor implementation issues. High performance computing issues such as pipelining, superscalar and vector processing. Input/output subsystem designs. A project is required."
COEN 691 "Topics In Computer Engineering I" "Note:Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COEN 691A, COEN 691B, etc."
COEN 7311 "Protocol Design and Validation" "Prerequisites:COEN 6311 and ELEC 6851 or COMP 6461."
COEN 7741 "Advanced Computer Architecture" "Prerequisite:COEN 6741.  Multiprocessing, Parallel processing, Vector processing, MIMD, SIMD, ILP (Instruction Level Parallelism), Superscalar, VLIW, Multithreading, Systolic processors, etc. A project is required."
COEN 791 "Topics In Computer Engineering II" "Note:Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COEN 791A, COEN 791B, etc."
ELEC 6041 "Large-scale Control Systems" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6131 or equivalent.  Introduction to large-scale systems and applications. Model-order reduction and minimal realization. Centralized and decentralized fixed modes (CDMs and DEMs). Characterization and computation of DEMs and approximate DEMs. Structured and unstructured DEMs. Quotient fixed modes and stabilizability of decentralized systems by means of linear time-varying control law. Effects of sampling on decentralized control systems. Centralized and decentralized robust servomechanism problem. Decentralized controller design using pole assignment technique and optimization method. A project is required."
ELEC 6051 "Introduction to Analog VLSI" "Challenges of IC techniques and of VLSI, BJT and MOS processes. Passive components; network models and simulations. Layout design rules and CAD packages. Switch, active resistor, current mirror and voltage references; differential amplifiers, comparators, operational amplifiers, transinductance amplifiers, voltage to current transducers. Noise considerations. Offset and precision techniques. Applications: RF amplifiers, filters, oscillators, current mode IC networks. A project is required."
ELEC 6061 "Real-time Computer Control Systems" "Introduction to real-time computer control systems; a review of discrete-time signals and systems, difference equations, z-transform; sampled data systems, sample and hold, discrete models; discrete equivalents of continuous-time systems; stability analysis; design specifications; design using root locus and frequency response methods; implementation issues including bumpless transfer, integral windup, sample rate selection, pre-filtering, quantization effects and computational delay; scheduling theory and priority assignment to control processes, timing of control loops, effects of missed deadlines; principles and characteristics of sensors and devices, embedded processors, processor/device interface. A project is required."
ELEC 6071 "Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems (*)" "Topics include overview of wireline communication links, mechanisms of signal degradation, modulation formats, TX/RX synchronization options, IC technology limitations, transmitter front-end circuits, receiver front-end circuits, decision circuits, clock and data recovery systems, phase-locked loops, jitter, continuous-time and discrete-time equalizers, system metrics. A project is required. "
ELEC 6081 "Modern Analog Filter Design" "Review of network analysis. Magnitude and frequency scaling. Magnitude and phase approximation in synthesis of filter functions. Second order active RC filters. Synthesis of all-pole LC ladder filters. Second order switched capacitor filters. Integrated circuit filters. A project is required."
ELEC 6091 "Discrete Event Systems" "Introduction to discrete-event systems (DES). Modelling (languages, automata and Petri nets). Supervisory control (controllability, modular control and control under partial observation). Architecture (decentralized and hierarchical schemes). Petri nets (modelling and analysis). Timed models. A project is required."
ELEC 6111 "Detection and Estimation Theory" "Prerequisite:ENCS 6161.  Basic hypothesis testing, cost functions, Bayes and Neyman Pearson tests, the power of a test, sequential tests; estimation, Bayes estimates, maximum a posteriori estimates; the Cramer-Rao inequality, maximum likelihood estimates; composite hypothesis testing, application of estimation theory to phase locked loops, vector representation of signals in noise, application of the Kharhunen-Loeve expansion, complex analytic representation of signals; detection and estimation of signals in white and non-white noise, the matched filter, composite hypothesis testing, random amplitude and phase, multi-path channels, waveform estimation, Wiener filters, Kalman filters. A project is required."
ELEC 6131 "Error Detecting and Correcting Codes" "Prerequisite:ENCS 6161 or ELEC 6831.  Introduction to abstract algebra; linear block codes: cyclic, BCH, and Reed-Solomon codes; convolutional codes; TCM codes; introduction to iterative based codes; turbo codes, LDPC codes; trade-offs between power, bandwidth, data rate and system reliability. A project is required."
ELEC 6141 "Wireless Communications" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6831.  Topics include wireless radio link analysis; receiver sensitivity and receiver noise sources; path loss, shadowing, and fading models; area coverage and range calculation; introduction to cellular systems: frequency reuse, trunking and grade of service, sectoring and cell splitting, coverage and capacity. Modulation techniques for mobile communications, spread-spectrum techniques; multiplexing and multiple access techniques; wireless standards from first generation to fourth generation; OFDM: an architecture for the fourth generation. A project is required."
ELEC 6151 "Information Theory and Source Coding" "Prerequisite:ENCS 6161.  Entropy of a source, rate distortion functions, source coding, analog to digital conversion, effects of sampling and quantization, vector quantization, discrete memoryless channels and their capacity, cost functions, channel coding theorem, channel capacity, fundamental concepts of information theory with applications to digital communications, theory of data compression, broadcast channels, application to encryption, DES, public key encryption, computational complexity. A project is required."
ELEC 6171 "Modelling and Analysis of Telecommunications Networks" "Prerequisite:ENCS 6161.  Application of queuing theory to the analysis of the performance of telecommunication systems; Poisson arrival process and its properties; Birth-death processes applied to queuing, service distributions; performance measures of a queuing systems; examples of queuing systems in equilibrium; finite and infinite server and population models; Erlang blocking formulae; method of stages.; Networks of queues; product-form solution for open and closed queuing networks; computational algorithms for queuing networks; the imbedded Markov chain technique applied to queues with general service distribution, analysis of multiple access techniques, TDMA, FDMA, polling, CDMA, ALOHA and CSMA. A project is required."
ELEC 6181 "Real-time and Multimedia Communication over Internet" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6851.  Review of Internet architecture and protocols. Network impairments: jitter and delay. RTP: transport protocols for real-time data. Packet scheduling, QoS in the Internet: differentiated services, integrated services, Resource reservation protocol (RSVP), Multi protocol label switching (MPLS). Voice/Fax/Video over IP. Internet-to-PSTN. Protocols and standards - H.323, Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP). Internet telephony signaling. Interoperability issues. A project is required."
ELEC 6221 "Solid State Devices (*)" "Junctiontheory (PN junctions, Schottky and ohmic contacts, heterojunctions).Structures and characteristics of diodes, solar cells, bipolar transistors, and fundamentals of MOSFETs.Planar silicon junctions and transistors will be designed, fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory, including resistivity measurements, semiconductor cleaning, oxidation, diffusion, photolithography, etching, metallization, and the comparison of design with experimental results. A projectis required."
ELEC 6231 "Design of Integrated Circuit Components (*)" "Thestructure, characteristics, and design of MOS capacitors and MOSFETs, FinFETs, SOI FETs, velocity-modulation transistors, and HFETs. Role of strain in operation of modern FETs. Planar MOS devices, including capacitors and MOSFETs will be designed, fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory. A projectis required."
ELEC 6241 "VLSI Process Technology (*)" "Introduction to basic VLSI technologies; crystal growth, thermal oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation, chemical vapour deposition, wet and dry etching, and lithography. Layout, yield, and VLSI process integration. The lab demonstrates a semiconductor device fabrication process. A project is required."
ELEC 6251 "Microtransducer Process Technology" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6231 or ELEC 6241.  Overview of micromachining process. Bulk-micromachined structures and devices. Anisotropic etching of silicon; phenomena, processes, geometry, crystal physics. Surface-micromachined structures, devices, processes. CMOS-compatible micromachining. Case-study examples. A project is required."
ELEC 6261 "Optical Devices for High-Speed Communications" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6221 or equivalent.  Overview of optical properties of semiconductors. The fundamental principles for understanding and applying optical fiber technology, fundamental behaviour of the individual optical components and their interactions with other devices. Lasers, LEDs, optical fibers, light detectors, optical switches. Concepts and components of WDM and DWDM. A comprehensive treatment of the underlying physics such as noise and distortion in optical communications, light polarization, modulation and attenuation. A project is required."
ELEC 6271 "Nanoscience and Nanotechnology: Opto-Electronic Devices" "This course covers the fundamental principles of nanoscience and nanotechnology which include principles of quantum mechanics and quantum properties of solid state materials. Properties of metal and semiconducting nanoparticles and their synthesis; Carbon nanostructures and nanotubes; bulk nanostructured materials; Solid disordered nanostructures and nanostructured crystals; quantum wells, quantum wires, and quantum dots and their physical properties; preparation of quantum nanostructures, Introduction to NanoElectroMechanical Systems (NEMS), nanomachining and fabrication of nanodevices. A project is required."
ELEC 6281 "Principles of Solid State Nanodevices" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6271 or equivalent.  Theoretical basis of nanodevices. Overview of fundamental quantum phenomena in semiconductors. Electronics in low-dimensional structures (two-dimensional electron gas, quantum wire and dots, electron scattering, transport). High-speed electron devices based on quantum structures (nanoscale MOSFETs, high-electron-mobility transistors, resonant-tunneling diodes and transistors, superlattice-based transistors). Logic gates based on quantum devices. Quantum optoelectronics (optical transitions in quantum structures, quantum well, quantum dots photodetectors and lasers, quantum cascade lasers). Single electron devices. Carbon nanotube transistors, molecular electronics and spintronics. Nanodevice technology and characterization. A project is required."
ELEC 6301 "Advanced Electromagnetics" "Maxwell's equations and boundary conditions.Theorems: uniqueness, reciprocity, surface and volume equivalence.Vector potentials and solution of the homogeneous and inhomogeneous wave equations. Waveguides and scattering formulations in rectangular and cylindrical coordinates. Dielectric waveguides. Physical optics. Selected topics in integral and differential equations, ray-optical techniques, and computational methods.Applications to antennas and microwaves.A project is required."
ELEC 6311 "Radiation and Scattering of Waves" "Construction of Greens functions. Canonical problems  waveguide, cylinder, wedge, dielectric slab. Sommerfeld integrals. Impedance boundary conditions. Surface and leaky waves. Asymptotics, method of steepest descent, method of stationary phase. High-frequency uniform asymptotic methods. Geometrical theory of diffraction. Edge diffraction, creeping waves. Applications to problems in antennas, computational electromagnetics, electromagnetic compatibility, propagation, and scattering. A project is required."
ELEC 6341 "Antennas (*)" "Antenna fundamentals and definitions. Radiation integrals. Dipoles and loops. Arrays. Antenna self and mutual inductance. Matching techniques. Travelling wave antennas. Broadband antennas. Equivalence principle. Aperture antennas. Numerical techniques. Antenna measurement techniques. A project is required."
ELEC 6351 "Modern Antenna Theory" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6341.  Helmholtz equation, Greens function, current element, the ideal dipole, radiation impedance, gain directivity, reciprocity, polarization. Half-wave dipole, antennas above ground, small loop antenna, arrays of antenna, array factor, pattern multiplication array synthesis, mutual impedance, aperture antenna. Hallens integral equation, Pocklingons equation, numerical solution by the method of weighted residuals, and by the moment method, wire grids. Magnetic field integral equation and solid surfaces. Aperture antennas, aperture integration, geometrical optics, physical optics. Geometrical theory of diffraction, wedge diffraction coefficients, applications, multiple diffraction and diffraction by curved surfaces. A project is required."
ELEC 6361 "Acoustics (*)" "Sound generation and propagation in elastic media; conversion between acoustical, electric and mechanical energy. Lumped-parameter approximations, sound in rooms, underwater acoustics, microphones; loudspeakers and audio communications problems; noise and vibration control problems. A project is required."
ELEC 6371 "Design of Wireless RF Systems" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6391.  Introduction to wireless systems. Noise and distortion in microwave systems. Antennas and propagation. Amplifiers. Mixers. Transistor oscillators and frequency synthesizers. Modulation techniques. Receiver design. Use of RF CAD tools. A project is required."
ELEC 6381 "Techniques in Electromagnetic Compatibility" "Introduction to EMC procedures, control plans and specifications. Radiated and conducted susceptibility and emission testing. Introduction EMC antennas, antenna concepts, electric and magnetic dipoles, biconical dipoles, conical log spiral antennas, setting up fields for susceptibility testing, measuring radiation from equipment. Coupled transmission lines, pulse propagation, closely spaced parallel transmission lines, capacitive coupling, inductive coupling, shielding against magnetic fields. Shielding and enclosures, electric and magnetic field screening mechanisms, shielding effectiveness, grounding considerations. EMC test facilities, screened rooms, TEM cells. Signals and spectra, intermodulation, cross-modulation, the spectrum analyzer. Noise and pseudo-random noise, noise performance of measurement/receiving systems, noise equivalent bandwidth, noise figure, antenna noise temperature and S/N ratio. A project is required."
ELEC 6391 "Microwave Engineering (*)" "Properties of waveguides, striplines and microstrips. Scattering parameters. Butterworth and Chebyshev impedance transformers. Microwave couplers, cavities, and Fabry-Perot resonators. Periodic structures. Microwave filter design. Faraday rotation and non-reciprocal devices. A project is required."
ELEC 6411 "Power Electronics I (*)" "Introduction to power electronic systems. Semiconductor switches. Basic power converter configurations. Line commutated controlled and uncontrolled ac-dc rectifiers. Basic dc-dc converters. Pulse width modulation techniques. Basic dc-ac converters. Switching power supplies. Applications to industrial power supplies and motor drives. A project is required."
ELEC 6421 "Renewable Energy Systems (*)" "Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.  This course covers electrical basics and models of solar energy (photo-voltaics); electrical power from wind energy (including turbine operation); electrical power from wave and tidal energy; electrical power from micro-hydro and biomass waste to energy. Fundamental energy equations will be derived from physics and the electrical power equations developed. Engineering design implications will be discussed. Design assignments are given to reinforce the engineering design based on fundamental physics. A project is required."
ELEC 6431 "Advanced Electrical Machines and Drives" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6471 or ELEC 6491.  Transient modelling of electrical machines. ABC, Parks transform and d,q, two axis modelling of synchronous and induction machines. Application of the advanced models to machine transients, for example, direct on line starting or reclosing operation. Vector control of AC machines including permanent magnet machines. Differences between permanent magnet AC and brushless DC machines. Switched reluctance motor modelling and operation. Modelling of losses in machines. A project is required."
ELEC 6471 "Hybrid Electric Vehicle Power System Design and Control (*)" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6411.  Introduction to Electric Vehicles (EV), Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEV). Vehicle design fundamentals. Traction motors for EV/HEV propulsion. On-board energy sources and storage devices: high-voltage traction batteries, fuel cells, ultra-capacitors, flywheels. Power electronic converters and control. Various EV/HEV/Fuel Cell Vehicle topologies and modelling. Energy management strategies. Practical design considerations. Engineering impact of electric, hybrid electric, and fuel cell vehicles. A project is required."
ELEC 6481 "Computer-Aided Analysis and Design of Electric Machines" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6411.  This course uses machine design software to aid in the analysis and design of electrical machines, which is offered in a computer-aided design (CAD) environment. The emphasis is on the design of electrical machines for renewable energy and electric vehicle applications. Emphasis is placed on permanent-magnet and switched reluctance machines, although machines of importance, like the induction machine, are also discussed. Magnetic equivalent circuits for a magnet and a typical machine radial field geometry are developed which lead naturally to sizing equations. Other geometries and Eddy current and hysteresis core loss models are presented. The torque angle curves of the switched reluctance machine are developed, which lead to design concepts. The synchronous reluctance machine is introduced. A project is required."
ELEC 6491 "Controlled Electric Drives" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6411.  Elements of a drive system; characteristics of common mechanical systems; drive characteristics; operation in one, two or four quadrants. Fully controlled rectifier drives; braking of DC motors; control of DC motors using DC/DC converters. Control of polyphase induction motors; voltage-source and current source inverter drives; frequency-controlled induction motor drives; introduction to vector control of induction motor drives; field oriented control (FOC); sensor-less operation. Control of synchronous motors; permanent magnet motors. Switched reluctance motor (SRM) drives; stepper motors. Brush-less DC (BLDC) motor drives; low-power electronic motor drives. A project is required."
ELEC 6601 "Digital Signal Processing" "Discrete-time signals and systems, difference equation; the discrete Fourier series and transform; the Z-transform and LTI systems; sampling of continuous-time signals. Reconstruction of signals using interpolation, sampling of discrete-time signals, discrete-time decimation and interpolation, changing the sampling rate by integer and non-integer factor; multirate signal processing, polyphase decomposition, multirate filter banks; digital processing of analog signals, A/D and D/A converters; linear phase and non-linear phase systems, all-pass and minimum phase systems; recursive and non-recursive digital filters, common digital filter structures, common design approaches for digital filters; random signals; linear adaptive filters, Weiner and Least-Mean-Square filters. A project is required."
ELEC 6611 "Digital Filters" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6601.  Approximation and design of recursive and non-recursive digital filters. Transformations. Stability. Digital filter structures including wave and lattice structures. Effect of quantization, noise and limit cycles. Hardware implementation. Digital filter applications. A project is required."
ELEC 6621 "Digital Waveform Compression" "Prerequisites:ELEC 6601; ENCS 6161."
ELEC 6631 "Video Processing and Compression" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6601.  Topics include frequency analysis video signals, colour video models; TV and video capture and display, spatial-temporal basic operations, elementary visual features; vector matrix video notation; frequency response of human vision; theory of video sampling, video quality assessment; motion modelling and estimation; temporal frame prediction, video filtering, high-dynamic-range video; fundamentals of video compression, transform coding, predictive coding, recent video compression standards, digital TV, advanced topics. A project is required."
ELEC 6641 "Two-dimensional Signal and Image Processing" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6601.  Two-dimensional signals and systems: linear system fundamentals, Fourier analysis of two-dimensional signals, discrete Fourier transform, two-dimensional FIR and IIR filter design and implementations. Image enhancement and restoration: smoothing and sharpening, noise reduction, order statistics filtering, inverse filtering, Wiener filtering, constrained least-square filtering. Wavelets and filter banks: multiresolution concept, perfect reconstruction, one- and two-dimensional wavelet transforms. Introduction to image compression: lossy and lossless compression, image compression standards. Introduction to image segmentation and edge detection. Color image processing: color image representation, color space conversion, pseudo and full color image processing. A project is required."
ELEC 6651 "Adaptive Signal Processing" "Prerequisites:ELEC 6601; ENCS 6161."
ELEC 6661 "Medical Image Processing (*)" "Topics include principles and techniques used in the processing and analysis of medical images; image quality metrics, denoising medical images, quantification, rigid and deformable registration; similarity metrics such as mutual information (MI); images from the most common medical imaging modalities (X-ray, CT, MRI and ultrasound) will be used. A project is required."
ELEC 6671 "Biological Signal Processing (*) " "Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.  This course covers signal processing through discussion of current bioengineering activities which rely on signal processing and include assessment of neural function with simultaneous collection of electroencephalogram (EEG) and functional MRI data; the noninvasive assessment of cardiac autonomic regulation using electrocardiography; assessment of neural function using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS); assessment of muscle activity using electromyography (EMG). Topics include modern spectral analysis, time-frequency analysis (short-time Fourier transforms and wavelets); signal modelling; multivariate analyses and adaptive filtering. A project is required."
ELEC 6831 "Digital Communications" "Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.  Topics include random processes and linear systems; baseband modulation/demodulation, optimal receivers in AWGN, correlation and matched-filter receivers, pulse shaping for band-limited channels; bandpass modulation techniques such as PAM, PSK, DPSK, FSK, QAM; synchronization, timing and carrier recovery, maximum-likelihood carrier phase and symbol timing estimation; error control coding, linear block codes, syndrome-based decoding, system bit error rate and coding gain. A project is required."
ELEC 6841 "Advanced Digital Communications" "Prerequisites:ELEC 6831; ENCS 6161."
ELEC 6851 "Telecommunications Networks" "Communication Networks and Services; Introduction to Layered Network Architectures; Transmission systems and the Telephone Network: multiplexing circuit switching, routing and signaling; Peer-to-Peer Protocols: ARQ protocols, data link controls, packet multiplexing, Multiple Access Communications: Aloha, CSMA, reservation schemes, polling, token-passing ring, LAN standards, LAN Bridges; Packet-switching Networks: Datagrams and virtual circuits; TCP/IP Architecture: Internet protocol, transmission control protocol. A project is required."
ELEC 6861 "Higher Layer Telecommunications Protocols" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6851.  Broadband communications: concept, issues, signaling techniques, examples. Multimedia communications: traffic characteristics, classes, issues (e.g. QOS) and architectures. Internetworking: issues, architectures (e.g. router, bridge, gateway), protocols and standards: ISO, IP and IPv6. Network Management: issues, architecture, management information base (MIBs), SNMP, TMN and CMIP. Advanced topics, such as policy approach for network management. A project is required."
ELEC 6871 "Fiber-Optic Communication Systems and Networks" "Overview of the basics of optical transmitters, optical receivers, optical fibers, optical amplifiers, and SDH/SONET. Design of optical fiber amplifiers: fiber Raman amplifiers and Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFA), theories, configurations, simulation, designs, applications, requirements for optical networks. Optical transmitters: characteristics and requirements for optical networks. Optical receivers: characteristics, requirements, noise analysis. Optical systems and performance: system architectures, design guidelines, long-haul systems, dispersion management. Coherent optical systems: ASK, FSK, DPSK, system performance. DWDM systems and networks: WAN and MAN system performance, TDM, subcarrier multiplexing, CDMA, WDM network design, network survivability. Optical solition systems: fiber solitions, loss-managed solitions, dispersion-managed solitions, impact of amplifier noise, high-speed solition system. Photonic packet switching: OTDM synchronization, header processing, burst switching. Access optical networks: architectures, PON. A project is required."
ELEC 6891 "Broadcast Signal Transmission (*)" "This course covers signal definition, human eye limitations, pixel representation schemes, serial digital interface (SDI); image formats (1080i, 720i, 4k, 8k); compression schemes: H.264/265; modulation and coding techniques used in broadcasting. Terrestrial transmission standards such as DVB-T2, ATSC-3; satellite broadcasting standards such as DVB/S2; MPEG transport stream (MPEG-TS), program specific information (PSI), program ID (PID), program association tables (PAT), program map table (PMT), conditional access, program, program clock reference (PCR); multiplexing and IP encapsulation, single program transport stream (SPTS) and multiple program transport stream (MPTS); video storage and retrieval. A project is required. "
ELEC 691 "Topics in Electrical Engineering I" "See Note inTopic Area E02"
ELEC 6961 "Graduate Seminar in Electrical and Computer Engineering" "Students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Department and submit a comprehensive report on topics presented in one of these seminars. The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 1000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred toForm and Style: Thesis, Reports, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Mifflin. Seminar: two hours per week."
ELEC 7151 "Broadband Communications Networks" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6171.  Characterization of traffic sources, data, voice and video; ATM protocol architecture, ATM switching architectures, performance evaluation of the ATM multiplexer; Call admission control in ATM networks; Traffic management in ATM, TCP/IP over ATM and wireless ATM Fluid flow approximation, z-transform techniques, and blocking for multiclass flows. A project is required."
ELEC 7441 "Design of Power Electronic Circuits" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6461.  Design driving factors. Characteristics of basic converter topologies, including resonant and soft switching circuits. Characteristics and limitations of power semiconductors as switching devices. Design considerations for gate drives, snubbers, power filters and protection circuits. Printed circuit board and thermal design. Application to the practical design of typical power converter systems. A project is required."
ELEC 7451 "Power System Compensation" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6411.  Steady state and dynamic characteristics of transmission systems. Theory of line compensation and reactive power control; series and shunt passive compensation. Principles of operation of static compensators and basic configurations; series, shunt and shunt-series. Flexible ac transmission systems (FACTS). Line and self commutated controllers; configurations and control aspects. Applications to distribution systems. Performance evaluation and practical applications of static compensators. A project is required."
ELEC 791 "Topics in Electrical Engineering II" "See Note inTopic Area E02"
ELEC 8011 "Doctoral Seminar in Electrical Engineering (***)" "Grading on a Pass/Fail basis only. No credit value."
ENCS 5721 "Composition and Argumentation for Engineers" "Fundamentals of English composition and argumentation: grammar, reasoning and persuasion; persuasive proofs; argumentation; structuring and outlining: the problem statement; the body; and the conclusions. Language and persuasion for effective communication in professional engineering. Cultivation of a writing style firmly based on clear and critical thinking skills. Lectures: three hours per week."
ENCS 6001 "Elements of Engineering Mathematics" "Functions of one variable, Taylors series expansion, review of differentiation, integration and solution of ordinary differential equations. Functions of several variables, partial derivatives, multiple integrals, introduction to partial differential equations, wave equation and diffusion equation. Matrix and vector analysis, characteristic value problems, orthogonal functions; introduction to statistics and numerical methods. Lectures: three hours per week."
ENCS 6021 "Engineering Analysis" "Sturm-Liouville problem; orthogonal functions; ordinary differential equations with variable coefficients and power series solutions; integral transforms; partial differential equations; boundary value problems; applications to engineering problems. A project is required."
ENCS 6031 "Cultures of Engineering Practice" "Topics include historical emergence of engineering throughout the world; cross-cultural dimensions of contemporary engineering practice; qualitative research methods for cultural analysis; technical communication across cultures. Case studies and a project are required."
ENCS 6041 "Creativity, Innovation, and Critical Thinking" "Explanations of innovative and creativity thinking; approaches to problem solving, psychology of invention; diffusion of innovation; leadership through critical thinking; design creativity; modern and historical examples of innovation; and cognitive approaches to scientific and technological thinking. A project is required."
ENCS 6043 "Seminar in Innovation Process" "Prerequisites or co-requisites: ENCS 6041 and ENCS 6042."
ENCS 6044 "Practicum in Innovation Process" "Prerequisites: ENCS 6041, 6042 and 6043. "
ENCS 6111 "Numerical Methods" "Numerical solution of partial differential equations; weighted residuals techniques with emphasis on finite differences and finite elements; convergence, stability and consistency analysis; solution of integral equations; boundary value problems; discrete Fourier series and fast Fourier transform. A project is required."
ENCS 6141 "Probabilistic Methods in Design" "Prerequisite:ENCS 6011 or equivalent.  Elements of probability theory, decision models, expected costs and benefits, models from random occurrences, extreme value statistics, Monte Carlo simulation, reliability analysis, general applications to engineering design problems. A project is required."
ENCS 6161 "Probability and Stochastic Processes" "Axioms and rules of probabilities, Bayes Theorem, binary communication systems, Bernoulli trials and Poisson Theorem, random variables, distributions and density functions, moments, correlation, Chebyshev and Markovs inequalities, characteristic functions, Chernoff inequality, transformation of random variable, random processes, stationarity, Bernoulli, Random Walk, Poisson, shot noise, random telegraph, and Wiener processes, stopping time; Walds equation, elements of Renewal Theory, Mean-Ergodic Theorem, auto and cross-correlation functions, correlation time, auto-correlation receiver, Wiener-Khinchin Theorem, power spectral density, linear system with stochastic inputs, matched filtering. Project: two hours per week."
ENCS 6181 "Optimization Techniques I (*)" "The optimization problem; classical optimization; one dimensional search techniques; unconstrained gradient techniques; quadratically convergent minimization algorithms; constrained optimization; constrained gradient techniques; penalty-function methods; applications. Project: two hours per week."
ENCS 6191 "Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic" "Fuzzy sets, operations on fuzzy sets, fuzzy relations; fuzzy logic: connectives, implication functions, representation of fuzzy rules and fuzzy logic based reasoning; fuzzy logic in planning and control: Zadehs Generalized Modus Ponens type reasoning, Mamdani type reasoning, fuzzy clustering based system identification and Sugeno type reasoning; case studies. Projects on selected applications."
ENCS 6721 "Technical Writing and Research Methods for Scientists and Engineers" "This course provides graduate students with the research writing and presentation skills that are essential in academic and professional contexts. Students develop expertise and confidence in research methods, critical reading, crafting thesis statements, leading and participating in discussions, revision/editing and peer review, maintaining research dossiers and report writing."
ENCS 6811 "Optical Networking: Architectures and Protocols" "This course introduces advanced concepts and protocols of modern telecommunication networks based on Photonic technology. The basics of optical communications networks will be introduced, including the enabling technology, and the main emphasis will be on network architectures and associated protocols. This includes: orientation of transport networks and their evolution (Ring and Mesh topologies); Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM); wavelength-routed networks; wavelength conversion; lightpath routing protocols (static, dynamic, adaptive routing and traffic grooming) and optimization problems; control and management protocols and distributed provisioning; survivable network design (proactive and reactive); fault-management and various network restoration protocols; convergence of optical networks and the Internet (IP/WDM) and Generalized Multi Protocol Label Switching (G-MPLS). There will be various assignments in which students will be involved in research projects. Knowledge of telecommunication systems and a background in network simulation is needed. Project."
ENCS 6821 "Development and Global Engineering" "This is an introductory course in international development and global engineering for graduate students. Topics may include evolution of development, globalization, development projects, planning and analysis, and participatory data gathering. A project is required."
ENCS 691 "Topics in Engineering and Computer Science" "Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated bythe topic title following the course number on the student record, e.g. ENCS 691 Course Topic: Environment and Social Sustainability."
ENCS 6931 "Industrial Stage and Training" "Prerequisite:Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.  This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required)."
ENCS 8011 "PhD Seminar (****)" "Prerequisite:ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal.  The PhD Seminar is designed to train students to communicate the results of their research projects to the community and participate in research discussions. This is done when the students have sufficiently progressed into their research, normally after 6 (12 for part-time students) months of being admitted to candidacy, which is normally after 24 (48 for part-time students) months of residency, and must be completed before the submission of the thesis. The students evaluation, reflected by either a pass or fail grade, is based upon attendance in all seminars, a report on the students thesis research under the direction of the thesis supervisor(s), and a presentation."
ENCS 8501 "Comprehensive Examination" "See Requirements for the Degree inEngineering Programssection."
ENCS 8511 "Doctoral Research Proposal" "The goal of the doctoral research proposal is to focus the students PhD research. The proposal must include an extensive critical review of previous work on the subject of the thesis, and a detailed research plan of action and expected milestones. Students are required to defend their doctoral research proposal before a committee that will normally be comprised of the same members as the comprehensive examination committee."
ENGR 6071 "Switched and Hybrid Control Systems" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6131 or equivalent.  Review of linear control design techniques for nonlinear systems and their limitations; introduction to Lyapunov stability, Lyapunov functions and LaSalles invariance principle; introduction to switched and hybrid systems using piecewise-affine systems as a motivating example; modelling and simulation of switched and hybrid systems; switching policies, hybrid automata and executions; Lyapunov stability analysis of switched and hybrid systems; stability as a convex optimization problem; Lyapunov-based control of switched and hybrid systems; controller design as a non-convex problem; stability analyses and the controller design problems; dynamic programming and optimal control techniques; extensive examples from simplified models of industrial problems in the aeronautical, automotive and process industries. The course includes a computer aided controller design project."
ENGR 6131 "Linear Systems (*)" "State-space representation of dynamic systems, canonical realizations, solutions, modal decomposition, stability. Controllability and observability, minimal realizations, state feedback, pole placement, observers, observer-based controllers. Introduction to optimal control, linear quadratic regulator, the Kalman filter. Limitation on performance of control systems, introduction to robustness. A project is required."
ENGR 6141 "Nonlinear Systems" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6131.  Dynamic systems: definitions and notations; nonlinear differential equations; Lipschitz continuity; linearization; describing functions; phase plane analysis; Lyapunov stability; Popov and circle criteria; limit cycles. A project is required."
ENGR 6161 "Sensors and Actuators" "Elements of smart sensors and systems and their structures; properties of various smart materials including piezoelectric, pyroelectric, shape memory alloys, Rheological fluids, piezoresistive and magnetostrictive; physical and mathematical basis of smart materials; characterization of smart multi-functional materials; sensors and actuators in mechatronics; design and fabrication of sensors and actuators by micromachining; survey of classical system theory; design of sensors and actuators for applications in industrial and medical robotics, haptics, and other systems such as aerospace and smart structures. The students are required to undertake a project work involving design of smart sensors/actuators for specific applications."
ENGR 6191 "Introduction to Biomedical Engineering" "The origin and characteristics of biological potentials: nerve, muscle, heart, brain; the measurement of biological events; instrumentation systems: electrical safety, biomechanics, biomaterials, orthopaedic engineering; biomedical engineering applications/implications in industry. Project on a current topic."
ENGR 6201 "Fluid Mechanics" "Fundamental concepts of fluid mechanics; transport phenomena; stress-strain relation; equations of motion; exact solutions; dynamic similarity; specialized equations; laminar boundary layers; flow over immersed bodies; introduction to turbulent flow. Projects on selected topics."
ENGR 6221 "Microfluidic Systems" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6201 or equivalent.  Introduction to microfluidics: continuum fluid mechanics, non-continuum regimes, molecular approach. Review of classical fluid mechanics: gas flows, liquid flows, two-phase flows. Microfluidic effects: low Reynolds number flows and chaotic mixing, electrokinetics, surface tension effects and electrowetting. Electrostatic/electromagnetic/piezoelectric actuation of microfluidic systems. Methods in microfluidics: computation, experimentation. Microfluidic components: microchannels, micromixers, micropumps, microvalves, microsesors. Overview of microfluidic applications: lab-on-chip devices, microstructured fuel cells. A project is required."
ENGR 6231 "Microfluidic Devices for Synthetic Biology (*)" "Topics include introduction to microfluidic components (pumps, valves, automation), programming microfluidics, fabrication techniques, microfluidic paradigms, and applications for chemical and biological analysis; introduction to synthetic biology, biological parts and their properties, network structure and pathway engineering, synthetic networks, manipulating DNA and measuring responses, basic behaviour of genetic circuits, building complex genetic networks; integration of mircofluidics and synthetic biology; economic implications. A project is required."
ENGR 6241 "Hydrodynamics" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6201.  Fundamental concepts of ideal flow; irrotational flow patterns; kinematics of flow; potential theory; standard flow patterns; conformal transformation; Cauchy-Riemann condition; complex operator; simple engineering applications. A project is required."
ENGR 6251 "The Finite Difference Method in Computational Fluid Dynamics" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6201.  Classification of second order partial differential equations, boundary conditions. Finite difference discretization of equations, truncation error, explicit and implicit formulations. Numerical stability, consistency and convergence. Time dependent (parabolic) equations, explicit and implicit discretization, stability, convergence. Steady state (elliptic) equations, explicit and implicit discretization, iterative and direct solution methods. Hyperbolic equations. Formulation of flow problems and applications to incompressible, compressible and transonic inviscid and viscous flows are interspersed throughout the course. Project on specific topic or applications."
ENGR 6261 "The Finite Element Method in Computational Fluid Dynamics" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6201.  Classification of second order partial differential equations, boundary conditions. The finite element method, simple examples, assembly rules, solution of linear systems of equations. Forming the modules of a general FEM computer code. The variational approach, variational principles and stationary functions. Elements and interpolation functions. The weighted residual approach Rayleigh-Ritz, least squares, subdomain and collocation, weak Galerkin formulation. Formulation of flow problems and applications to incompressible, compressible and transonic inviscid and viscous flows are interspersed throughout the course. Project on specific topic or applications."
ENGR 6281 "Modelling Turbulent Flows" "Computational methods in fluid mechanics, the Reynolds-averaged equations, scales of turbulence, two-point correlation tensors, algebraic models, one equation and two equation models, Boussinesq approximation, nonlinear constitutive relations, types of turbulent flows, multiple time scales and stiff differential equations, solution convergence and grid sensitivity, brief introduction to advanced models. A project is required."
ENGR 6291 "Rheology" "Viscoelasticity, standard flows and material functions, relationships between material functions, generalized Newtonian fluid, the Maxwell model, finite linear viscoelasticity, continuum constitutive equations, effects of material, temperature and pressure on viscoelasticity behaviour, rheometry issues in viscoelastic flow simulations, industrial applications of rheology. A project is required."
ENGR 6301 "Advanced Dynamics" "Dynamics of rigid bodies; generalized coordinates; DAlemberts principle; Lagranges equations; energy methods, Hamiltons theory; Euler-Lagrange equations; variational principle of mechanics. Phase space canonical transformation. Language multipliers methods. Hamilton-Jacobe equation. Project on specific topic or applications."
ENGR 6311 "Vibrations in Machines and Structures (*)" "Vibrations of discrete systems: Single-Degree of Freedom (SDOF) and Multi-Degree of Freedom (MDOF) systems; continuous systems: bars, beams, membranes and plates with various boundary conditions; mode superposition; energy methods; Rayleigh-Ritz Method; condensation techniques; applications to machine components, rotor bearing systems, vehicle and aerospace structures. Project on selected topics is an integral part of the course."
ENGR 6371 "Micromechatronic Systems and Applications (*)" "Introduction to microsystems and devices; mechanical properties of materials used in microsystems; microfabrication and post-processing techniques; sacrificial and structural layers; lithography, deposition and etching; introduction and design of different types of sensors and actuators; micromotors and other microdevices; mechanical design, finite element modelling; design and fabrication of free-standing structures; microbearings; special techniques: double sided lithography, electrochemical milling, laser machining, LIGA, influence of IC fabrication methods on mechanical properties; application examples in biomedical, industrial and space technology areas; integration, bonding and packaging of MEMS devices. This course includes a project."
ENGR 6411 "Robotic Manipulators I: Mechanics (*)" "Types of industrial robots and their applications. Mathematical analysis for robot manipulation: homogeneous transformations; definition and solution of kinematic equations governing the position and orientation of the hand. Force analysis and static accuracy; forces and moments of inertia, dynamic equation of equilibrium, differential equations of motion of robotic arms. Robotic actuators. Project on specific topic or applications."
ENGR 6412 "Autonomy for Mobile Robots (*)" "Topics include application of autonomous wheeled robots: autonomous cars, indoor robots, (off-road) unmanned ground vehicles; robot motion models, robot odometry; robot sensor models: beam models of range finders, feature-based measurement models; occupancy grid mapping; the Bayes Filter; the Kalman filter; the particle filter; robot localization: particle filter localization, Kalman filter localization; introduction to simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). A project is required. "
ENGR 6421 "Standards, Regulations and Certification" "Overview of DoT and other international (FAA, etc.) aviation standards, regulations and certification procedures; regulatory areas, namely, pilot training/testing, air traffic procedures, aircraft systems design and airworthiness; development process for new regulations and criteria for certification. Projects on selected topics."
ENGR 6441 "Materials Engineering for Aerospace" "Fundamentals of materials engineering and processing with special emphasis on aerospace engineering materials and protection against failure; microstructures, phase equilibria for aerospace materials, dislocations, deformation, strain hardening and annealing, recovery, recrystallization; hot and cold metal forming (aircraft fabrication), solidification, castings (process and defects); welding and non-destructive testing, solid solution and dispersion strengthening; ferrous alloys and super alloys, light alloys (AL, MG, TI), ceramic materials, polymers, composite materials (polymer matrix/metal matrix); corrosion, fatigue and creep failure; fracture and wear. Projects on selected topics."
ENGR 6461 "Avionic Navigation Systems" "Introduction: history of air navigation; earth coordinate and mapping systems; international navigation standards; airspace and air traffic control structure; basics of flight instruments and flight controls; fundamental concepts of navigation. Classification of modern avionic navigation systems. Basics of air traffic communication: radio wave propagation; VHF and HF systems. Short range, long range, approach/terminal area avionic navigation systems and radar systems: principles; design; advantages/disadvantages; errors; impact of global positioning system and future trends. Introduction to advanced integrated avionic systems. Projects on selected topics."
ENGR 6471 "Integration of Avionics Systems (*)" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6461.  Introduction to the basic principles of integration of avionics systems; review of Earths geometry and Newtons laws; inertial navigation sensors and systems (INS); errors and uncertainty in navigation; global positioning system (GPS); differential and carrier tracking GPS applications; terrestrial radio navigation systems; Kalman filtering; integration of navigation systems using Kalman filtering; emphasis on integration of GPS and INS using Kalman filtering. A project is required."
ENGR 6501 "Applied Elasticity" "Plane stress and strain; analysis of stress and strain in three dimensions; Airys stress function; solution of two-dimensional problems by polynomials and Fourier series; effect of small holes in bars and plates; torsion and bending of prismatic bars; Membrane analogy; thermoelasticity; rectangular, circular, ring-shaped flat plates; applications in civil and mechanical engineering. A case study or a project is required."
ENGR 6151 "Continuum Mechanics" "This course presents the macroscopic mechanical behaviour of continuously distributed solid and fluid materials. This is a fundamental graduate course in the field of mechanical or aerospace engineering, which covers basic principles of continuum mechanics and their engineering applications. All laws of continuum mechanics are formulated in terms of quantities that are independent of coordinates. Thus, in this course, first the concept of tensors is presented in detail as the linear transformation. This is followed by the formulation of the kinematics of very small and large deformation and the description of stresses and the basic laws of continuum mechanics common to all materials. Finally, constitutive equations governing the behaviours of idealized materials, including the elastic, hyperelastic and viscous materials, are presented as applications of these laws. A project is required."
ENGR 6511 "Fundamentals of Finite ElementAnalysis of Structures (*)" "Topics include matrix formulation of the force and of the displacement methods of analysis; direct stiffness approach, finite element methods for structural analysis; truss, beam, plane strain, plane stress, shell and solid elements; computer applications.A projectis required."
ENGR 6531 "The Finite Element Method in Structural Mechanics" "Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.   Displacement analysis of structures finite elements of a continuum applications of the method to stress analysis of two-and three-dimensional structures stability problems vibrations and heat transfer digital computer applications. A project is required."
ENGR 6541 "Structural Dynamics" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6511.  Dynamic behaviour of structures; lumping of masses; motion of elastic framed structures caused by arbitrary disturbances; analytical and numerical methods of solution; approximate determinations of natural frequencies in elastic systems; dynamic response of framed structures in the inelastic range; continuous systems, introduction to approximate design methods. A case study or a project is required."
ENGR 6551 "Theory of Elastic and Inelastic Stability" "Analysis of elastic and inelastic stability of columns; frame buckling; beam-columns, strength of plates, shear webs and shells; torsiona; flexural buckling of thin-walled, open sections; snap-through; critical discussion of current design specifications; applications to structures. A case study or a project is required."
ENGR 6561 "Theory of Plates and Shells" "Analysis of deformation and stress in plates and flat slabs under transverse loads; various boundary conditions; numerical methods; membrane stresses and displacements in shells under various loading; bending theory of shells; limit analysis of rotationally symmetric plates and shells; applications to shell type structures such as folded plate structures; sandwich plates; shell roofs and pressure vessels. A case study or a project is required."
ENGR 6571 "Energy Methods in Structural Mechanics" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6511.  Principles of virtual work, total potential and complementary energy. Reisners Principle. Introduction to calculus of variations. Ritz and Galerkins methods. Applications to frame, plate and shell structures. A project is required."
ENGR 6581 "Introduction to Structural Dynamics (*)" "Theory of vibrations. Dynamic response of simple structural systems. Effects of blast, wind, traffic and machinery vibrations. Basic concepts in earthquake resistant design. Computer applications. A case study or a project is required."
ENGR 6601 "Principles of Solar Engineering" "Prerequisite:BLDG 6541.  Magnitude and availability of the solar energy input, including seasonal and diurnal variations of direct beam radiation; spectral distribution of sunlight; scattering and absorption processes; diffuse radiation; influence of cloud cover. Magnitude and time variation of typical loads, including space heating and cooling water heating; dehumidification. Principles of passive and active methods of solar collection, thermal conversion, and energy storage. Analysis of systems and components, including treatment of thermal and turbulent losses; efficiency calculations; electrical analogies; impedance matching and system optimization. Economics of systems. A case study or a project is required."
ENGR 6611 "Equipment Design for Solar Energy Conversion" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6201.  This course emphasizes the mechanical design of solar heating and cooling systems and consists of the following topics: thermodynamic analysis of radiation, collection and conversion of solar energy, selection and manufacturing of components such as collectors, piping, line insulation, heat exchangers, etc., solar cooling and dehumidification, control of solar energy systems, case studies and project experiences. A case study or a project is required."
ENGR 6661 "Solar Energy Materials Science" "The place of organisms and materials in the solar energy cycle; physical, chemical and optical phenomena. Selective absorbers: surfaces and films, emissivity, thermal conversion, role of crystal defects and phase interfaces in metals and semiconductors. Reflector characteristics and damage modes. Optical and mechanical properties of glass, polymer and composite windows. Photovoltaic: physics and materials. Chemical, thermal and photo stability. Thermal transfer and storage media: gaseous, aqueous, organic; phase change and particulate systems; stability and corrosive effects. A case study or a project is required."
ENGR 6811 "Energy Resources: Conventional and Renewable" "ENGR 691 Topics in Engineering I(4 credits)"
ENGR 692 "Case Study and Report" "Students complete a case study and submit a report on a topic related to the students discipline, supervised by a professor, and approved by the Graduate Program Director in students' home department. The case study and report must present a current engineering problem or practice related to the students' research interest."
ENGR 6951 "Seminar on Space Studies" "Prerequisite:Permission of Instructor.  Introduction to the science and technology of spaceflight; remote sensing; human factors in space; automation and robotics; space law; space transportation systems; the space station; the Moon-Mars initiative; space utilization; interplanetary travel. Project on selected topic."
ENGR 6971 "Project and Report I" "See Requirements for the Degree inEngineering Programssection. Project: 8 hours per week."
ENGR 6981 "Project and Report II" "See Requirements for the Degree inEngineering Programssection. Project: 8 hours per week."
ENGR 6991 "Project and Report III" "See Requirements for the Degree inEngineering Programssection. Project: 10 hours per week."
ENGR 7011 "Graduate Seminar in Mechanical and Industrial Engineering" "Seminar: 2 hours per week."
ENGR 7121 "Analysis and Design of Linear Multivariable Systems" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6131.  Representation of linear multivariable systems. Controllability, observability and canonical forms; poles and zeroes; multivariable system inverses; the linear quadratic regulator problem; the robust servomechanism problem; the minimal design problem; frequency-domain design techniques. Project: 2 hours per week."
ENGR 7131 "Adaptive Control" "Prerequisite:ELEC, 6061, ENGR 6131.  Real-time parameter estimation; least-squares and regression models; recursive estimators; model reference adaptive systems (MRAS); MRAS based on gradient approach and stability theory; self-tuning regulators (STR); adaptive prediction and control; stability and convergence results, robustness issues; auto-tuning and gain scheduling; alternatives to adaptive control; practical aspects; implementation and applications. Project: 2 hours per week."
ENGR 7181 "Digital Control of Dynamic Systems" "Prerequisites:ELEC 6061, ENGR 6131."
ENGR 7201 "Micro-Gravity Fluid Dynamics" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6201.  Forces and accelerations in space environment; zero-gravity simulation, free falling capsules, flights in Keplerian trajectories, sounding rockets, and the space station; surface tension; main non-dimensional parameters; Laplace-Young equation; contact angle; Dupres equation; Neumanns triangle; minimization principle associated with Laplaces equation; equilibrium shapes of a liquid, small oscillations of ideal and viscous fluids, liquid handling problems at low gravity, liquid positioning and control, vortexing capillary; numerical simulations of liquid dynamics in microgravity environment. Projects on selected topics."
ENGR 7331 "Random Vibrations" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6311.  Mathematical descriptions of stochastic processes; spectral density and correlation functions; Gaussian and non-Gaussian random processes; Markov processes and Fokker/Planck equation; response of linear and nonlinear oscillatory systems to random excitation; non-stationary and narrow-band random processes. Project on selected research topic or applications."
ENGR 7401 "Robotic Manipulators II: Control" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6411.  Control of a single link manipulator; position, velocity and acceleration errors; control of a multiple link manipulator sensor: vision, proximity, touch, slip, force, compliance and force controlled robots. Computer control of robots, command languages. Introduction to intelligent robots. Project on selected topics of current interest."
ENGR 7461 "Avionic Systems Design" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6461.  Definitions, purpose, history and evolution of avionic systems; cockpit displays configurations, classifications, and design considerations; ARINC communication bus system standards; air data computer system; navigation systems; automatic flight control systems; monitoring/warning/alert systems; flight management systems; system integration; advanced concepts and future trends. Projects on selected topics."
ENGR 7501 "Advanced Finite Element Method in Structural Mechanics" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6511or equivalent.  Topics includefinite elements of a continuum; applications of the method to stress analysis of two- and three-dimensional structures; stability problems; vibrations and heat transfer;non-linear methods;computer applications. A projectis required."
ENGR 7521 "Advanced Matrix Analysis of Structures" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6511.  Displacement method for two- and three-dimensional analysis of structures. Nonlinear large displacement analysis by stiffness method. Matrix formulations of vibration and stability problems. Computer applications. A project is required."
ENGR 7531 "Boundary Element Method in Applied Mechanics" "Boundary integral formulations of Axi-Symmetric, two- and three-dimensional potential and elastostatic problems. Treatment of thermal effects, singularity elements, infinite boundary elements. Coupling of boundary elements and finite elements. Introduction to non-linear, elastostatic problems. Numerical implementation. A case study or a project is required."
ENGR 791 "Topics in Engineering II" "See Note inTopic Area E02"
ENGR 7961 "Industrial Stage and Training" "Prerequisite:Completion of at least twelve credits in the composite option and at least twenty-one credits in the aerospace program or permission of program director.  This is an integral component of the aerospace program and the composites option in the Mechanical Engineering program that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer in the facilities of a participating company (Canadian work permit is required). The topic is to be decided by a mutual agreement between the student, the participating company and the program director. The course is graded on the basis of the students performance during the work period, which includes a technical report."
ENGR 8901 "Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis" "See Requirements for the Degree inEngineering Programssection."
ENGR 8911 "Doctoral Research and Thesis" "See Requirements for the Degree inEngineering Programssection."
INSE 6100 "Advanced Java Platforms" "Prerequisite:Permission of the CIISE is required.  This course emphasizes the architecture and the inner workings of the Java virtual machine; 3 distributions of the Java Platform: the micro-addition, the standard addition and the enterprise addition; the JCP process and the Java standards purposed as API extensions; semantic foundations of Java: static semantics and dynamic semantics. Introduction of technologies that are used to accelerate (performance analysis, hardware accelerators, ahead-of-time, just-in-time, selected dynamic compilation and component-based acceleration) and secure (virtual machines, such as vulnerability analysis, Java security models, byte-code verification, access controllers, security managers, policy files, and certified compilation) Java. Semantic correctness of acceleration and security techniques will also be addressed. A project is required."
INSE 6110 "Foundations of Cryptography" "Introduction to cryptography and cryptanalysis, classical ciphers, number-theoretic reference problems, the integer factorization problem, the RSA problem, the quadratic residuosity problem, computing square roots in Zn, the discrete logarithmic problem, the diffie-hellman problem, pseudorandom bits and sequences, stream ciphers: feedback shift registers, LFSRs, RC4. Block Ciphers: SPN and Fiestel structures, DES, AES, linear cryptanalysis, differential cryptanalysis, side channel attacks, ciphertext indistinguishability, attack analysis, IND-CPA, IND-CCA, IND-CCA2, public key encryption: RSA, Rabin, ElGamal, elliptic curves cryptography, hash functions: Un-keyed hash functions, MACs, Attacks, Digital signatures: RSA, Fiat-Shamir, DSA, public key infrastructure, key management, efficient implementation of ciphers, zero-knowledge proof. A project is required."
INSE 6120 "Crypto-Protocol and Network Security" "Prerequisite:INSE 6110 or equivalent.  Cryptographic protocols, authentication protocols, key distributions protocols, e-commerce protocols, fair-exchange and contract-signing protocols, security protocol properties: authentication, secrecy, integrity, availability, non-repudiation, atomicity, certified delivery, crypto-protocol attacks, design principles for security protocols, automatic analysis, public key infrastructure, models and architectures for network security, authentication using Kerberos and X.509, email security (PGP, S/MIME), IP security, SSL/TLS protocols, virtual private networks, firewalls intrusion detection, host-based IDS, network based IDS, misuse detection methods, anomaly detection methods, intrusion detection in distributed systems, intrusion detection in wireless ad hoc networks botnet detection, analysis and mitigation, darknet traffic analysis, prediction and forecast of network threats, network security monitoring. A project is required."
INSE 6130 "Operating Systems Security" "Prerequisite:INSE 6110 or equivalent.  System security, Windows security, Linux security, Unix security, access control matrix, HRU result, OS security mechanisms, security administration, access control list, capability list, role-based access control, security policy, mandatory and discretionary access control, multi-level security, BLP policy, Biba model, conflict of interest, Chinese Wall policy, secure booting, authentication, password security, challenge response, auditing and logging, system kernel security, threat analysis, security attacks, security hardened operating, host-based intrusion detection, securing network services, firewalls and border security, registry security, embedded and real-time OS security, information flow control. A project is required."
INSE 6140 "Malware Defenses and Application Security" "Prerequisite:INSE 6110 or equivalent.  Malicious code, taxonomy, viruses, worms, trojan horses, logical and temporal bombs, infection process, security properties of applications, safety, high level security, detection approaches, ad hoc techniques: scanning, anti-virus technology, obfuscation, dynamic analysis for security: passive and active monitoring, in-line and reference monitors, sandboxing, static analysis for security: data and control flow analysis for security, type-based analysis for security, anti-reverse-engineering protection, software fingerprinting, self-certified code: certifying compilers, proof carrying code, efficient code certification, typed assembly languages, certificate generation, certificate verification and validation, C and C++ security, java security, byte-code verification, access controllers, security managers, permission files, security APIs, critical APIs, protection domains, security profiles, mobile code security. A project is required."
INSE 6150 "Security Evaluation Methodologies" "Security evaluation of information systems, security evaluation of software, security evaluation of products. Security code inspection, security testing, security standards, preparation of a security evaluation: impact scale, likelihood scale, severity scale. Vulnerability analysis, risk analysis, security plan elaboration. ITSEC, MARION, and MEHARI methods, OCTAVE, common criteria, target of evaluation, protection profile, security functional requirement, security factors, errors, accidents, assurance requirements, assurance levels, evaluation process, compliance with the protection profile, IT security ethics, privacy, digital copyright, licensing IT security products, computer fraud and abuse, incident handling, business records, security forensics, security evaluation case studies. Information security governance: risk management, business strategy, standards, COBIT. Situation awareness. A project is required."
INSE 6160 "Database Security and Privacy" "Prerequisite:INSE 6110 or equivalent.  Access control in relational databases; grant/revoke model; security by views; query modification; Oracle VPD; auditing in databases; information warfare in databases; multi-level database security; polyinstantiation and covert channel; statistical database security; inference control; security by auditing; microdata security; random perturbation; outsourced database security, encrypted databases; SQL injection attack; anomaly detection in databases; data privacy, P3P; Hippocratic databases; perfect secrecy-based privacy; k-anonymity model; l-diversity; data utility measure, data release with public algorithms, multi-party privacy preserving computation; privacy in OLAP. A project is required."
INSE 6170 "Network Security Architecture and Management" "Security architecture and management, risk and threats, security attributes and properties, security design principles, security standards, security defence toolkit, and security building blocks, corporate VoIP, residential IPTV, IMS, cloud services, security functions and their implementation, operational considerations of deployment and management of security, configuration, vulnerability management and updates, incident management, emerging challenges and innovative solutions. A project is required."
INSE 6180 "Security and Privacy Implications of Data Mining" "Introduction to data mining and its applications; privacy legislations security and privacy threats caused by current data mining techniques; risks and challenges in emerging data mining applications; attacks and prevention methods: web privacy attacks, data mining-based intrusion detection; privacy-preserving data mining; privacy-preserving data publishing. A project is required."
INSE 6190 "Wireless Network Security" "Prerequisite:INSE 6110 or equivalent.  Introduction to wireless network security; security issues in cellular networks; authentication/key management in wireless LAN; secure handover; security in mobile IP; security issues in mobile ad-hoc networks: trust establishment, secure routing, anonymity; anonymous sensory data collection; privacy for smartphone applications. A project is required."
INSE 6210 "Total Quality Methodologies in Engineering" "Methodologies for quality engineering: six sigma, ACE (Achieving Competitive Excellence), Lean engineering, ISO9000 series; comparative study, quality clinic process charts, relentless root cause analysis, mistake proofing, market feedback analysis, process improvement and waste elimination, visual control, standard work and process management, process certification, setup reduction, total productive maintenance, DMAIC and DMADV processes, define phase, project charter, project scoping and planning, measure phase, critical to quality requirements, quality functional deployment, analyze phase, functional and process requirements, design requirements, design concepts, high-level design capability elaboration and evaluation, design phase, detailed design capability elaboration and evaluation, failure mode and effects analysis, control and verification plans, verify phase, pilot-scale processes, pilot testing and evaluation, implementation planning, full-scale processes, start-up and testing, performance evaluation, turnover to operations and maintenance, transition to process management, project closure. A project is required."
INSE 6220 "Advanced Statistical Approaches to Quality" "Introduction to quality control and total quality, statistical concepts and techniques in quality control, graphical methods for data presentation and quality improvement, statistical basis for control charts, pattern analysis in control charts, control charts for variables, control charts for individual measurements, control charts for attributes, process capability analysis, CUSUM charts and EWMA charts, acceptance sampling by attributes, acceptance plans by variables, reliability models, reliability and life testing plans, multivariate quality control, multivariate methods, aspects of multivariate analysis, multivariate normal distribution, multivariate tests of hypotheses, multivariate analysis of variance, principal components analysis, factor analysis, discrimination and classification, multivariate quality control, multivariate linear regression, design of experiments (DOE), Taguchi method, completely randomized design (CRD), randomized complete block design (RCBD), incomplete block designs, latin square designs, graeco-latin square designs, factorial designs, fractional factorial designs, split plot designs, and nested designs (compared to cross-over designs), quality in the service sector, service industries and their characteristics, model for service quality and applications. A project is required."
INSE 6230 "Total Quality Project Management" "Role of a project manager, learning and applications, project management processes, project management in quality initiatives, intellectual property protection, customer project management and critical-to-quality requirements, project planning and execution, team formation, goals, roles, procedures and interpersonal relationship, types of teams, creating a project plan, project tracking, project compliance requirements, sourcing and supplier qualification, government contract data rights, government property, risk management process, action planning, project communication, customer, team and stakeholder communications, communication planning and strategy, web-based collaboration, project management software tools. A project is required."
INSE 6240 "Executive Communication" "Communication plan elaboration, preparing presentations, developing a sound strategy, organizing for effectiveness, capturing the audience, the impromptu speech, introducing a speaker, reading a paper, leading a conference, interpersonal communication, use of voice, active listening, assertive speaking, giving and receiving feedback, assertive techniques, work styles, conflict and dispute resolution, negotiation, managing difficult situations, writing skills, interpersonal communications, business letters, formal reports, communication technology. A project is required."
INSE 6250 "Quality Methodologies for Software" "Prerequisite:INSE 6210 or equivalent, COMP 5541 or equivalent.  Quality methodologies for software, calculating sigma values, graphical analysis, quality processes for software, MAIC, DMADV, define overview, project context, initial analysis and design, lifecycle and multi-generational planning, project management, risk analysis, measure overview, customer needs, quality functional deployment for software, software metrics and requirements, scorecards, meta-models, specification languages (SDL, B, Z, etc.), software modelling (UML, Core, IDEF, etc.), graphical languages, design and verify overview, failure mode and effect analysis for software, defensive programming, smart and simple design, peer reviews, performance analysis, statistical tools, software testing, software verification. A project is required."
INSE 6260 "Software Quality Assurance" "Prerequisite:INSE 6210 or equivalent, COMP 5541 or equivalent.  Quality assurance, quality factors, components of a software quality assurance system, contract review, software development and quality plans, activities and alternatives, integration of quality activities in a project lifecycle, reviews, software inspection, software verification, testing processes, static analysis, control-flow analysis, data-flow analysis, control-flow testing, loop testing, data-flow testing, transaction-flow testing, domain testing, type-based analysis, dynamic analysis, usage models, operational profiles, result and defect analysis, reliability, performance analysis, maintenance and reverse engineering, case tools and software quality assurance. A project is required."
INSE 6270 "Quality-Based Systems Engineering" "Prerequisite:INSE 6210 or equivalent.  System engineering, quality-based system development process, acquisition and specification of system requirements, system design and prototyping, system implementation and testing, modelling languages for system engineering (SysML, IDEF, CORE, etc.), exchange mechanisms for system engineering data (AP233, XMI, etc.) gathering, specification, formulation, and refinement of system requirements, customer requirements, market requirements, technical requirements, implementation requirements, eco-requirements (scenario-based requirements gathering and refinement, affinity diagram, analytic hierarchy analysis), conflict resolution (TRIZ), management of system requirements in the design process (axiomatic design, decision tree, morphology matrix, systematic design), management of system requirements in the implementation process (six-sigma, ACE, Lean, ISO 9000, ERP, SAP, CMMS), case studies. A project is required."
INSE 6280 "Quality Assurance for Systems Engineering" "Prerequisite:INSE 6210 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.  Introduction to quality assurance and quality factors in systems engineering, components of a quality assurance system, principles of verification, validation and accreditation of systems, Vvsystem modelling languages, model semantics, techniques for V principles of system simulation (types of problems, simulation systems and their classification, principles of simulation system design and implementation), verification and validation techniques for simulation models (problem entity, conceptual model, and computerized model), development of simulation platforms, standards for system simulation, high level architecture (HLA). A project is required."
INSE 6290 "Quality in Supply Chain Design" "Evolution of supply chain, lingo, notation, master planning, role in business, performance analysis, activity profiling, strategic quality planning for supply chain, inventory planning and management (IP&amp;M), perfect order percentage, inventory turns, fill rates and substitutions, purchase and customer order cycle times, customer service and order processing (CS&amp;OP), network planning, supply contracts, distribution strategies, coordinated product and supply chain design, quality and innovation in product design, design for maintainability, designing for reliability, environmental considerations in supply chain design, designing quality services, make, buy, and sourcing analysis, supplier partnerships, global sourcing active assembly, supply chain management systems, efficient transportation, efficient warehousing, impact of e-commerce on supply chains, information technology and decision support systems, e-business strategies, e-business transactions, e-commerce platforms for supply chain. A project is required."
INSE 6300 "Quality Assurance in Supply Chain Management" "Supply chain management, definition, models, evolution and evaluation, quality attributes, evaluation criteria, key supply chain management issues, supply chain cost reduction opportunities, sales and operating planning hierarchy, gathering data required for sales and operation planning, inventory management techniques, effective supply chain management, supply and demand synchronization, aligning customer demands to order fulfillment, management of supply chain constraints, supply chain performance measurements, supply chain Information, communication, security, information flows, security measures, global supply chain quality and international quality standards, customer driven quality, managing supplier quality in the supply chain, the tools of quality; statistically based quality improvement for variables and attributes; managing quality improvement teams and projects. A project is required."
INSE 6310 "Systems Engineering Maintenance Management" "Maintenance concepts in engineering systems; component replacement; optimal component preventive replacement intervals; age-based replacement models for components; spare parts provision; optimal inspection decisions; condition based maintenance systems; proportional hazards model; capital equipment replacement; maintenance resource planning; reliability centered maintenance; equipment degradation analysis; degradation prediction; maintenance information system; maintenance software. A project is required."
INSE 6311 "Sustainable Infrastructure Planning and Management Systems" "This multi-disciplinary course will provide the basic knowledge for developing advanced information systems that can be used to systematically plan and manage infrastructure (e.g. roads and bridges) throughout its lifecycle, including environmental impact assessment. The course will cover the following topics: Definition and history of Infrastructure, Types and functions of Infrastructure, Infrastructure Planning, Performance Modelling, Failure Analysis and Reliability Issues, Infrastructure Inspection and Monitoring, Maintenance and Rehabilitation Strategies, Environmental Management and Sustainability Issues, and Integrated Infrastructure Management Systems. Projects."
INSE 6320 "Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering" "Introduction to risk analysis theory. Risk assessment methodologies, risk assessment techniques and standards for information systems, review of probability theory, hazard identification, fault tree analysis, event tree analysis, sensitivity analysis, qualitative risk analysis, quantitative risk analysis, case studies on information systems, value analysis and integrated risk management. A project is required."
INSE 6400 "Principles of Systems Engineering" "Origins of systems engineering; modern engineering systems; structure of complex systems; systems life cycle; systems engineering management; system decomposition and architecture; systems with uncertain and imperfect information; structural and dynamics modelling; integration and evaluation: production, operation and support; systems engineering decision tools; special topics: systems of systems, sustainability, mass collaboration. A project is required."
INSE 6411 "Product Design Theory and Methodology" "This course introduces main design theories and methodologies for the conceptual and configuration design of mechanical/manufacturing systems. It includes the following topics: general design process; introduction to design theory and methodologies; user requirements analysis; structure of design problem; design concept and product configuration generation methods; evaluation of design concepts and product configuration; sources and resolution strategies of design conflicts; computer-assistance of all these tasks; and case studies of product design. A project is required."
INSE 6421 "Systems Integration and Testing" "Introduction to integration and testing of complex systems; fundamentals of project planning; process analysis; workflow modelling; six sigma tools and methodologies for systems integration; formulation of systems operational assessment and concept; systems architecture, functions and capabilities composition and packaging into high-level system architecture; modelling and analysis methods for representing system functionality and capability; interface description and management; testability and interoperability testing; management issues pertaining to integrated product teams, vendors, suppliers, and subcontractors. A project is required."
INSE 6431 "Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols" "Prerequisite: ELEC 6851, COMP 6461 or equivalent.  Design, provisioning and management of ad hoc wireless networks. Concepts, architectures and protocols related to the efficient design and high performance of ad hoc wireless networks. Medium access control schemes; mathematical analysis. Analysis of access protocols in multihop networks; derive the system capacity. Study of various control knobs for improving the network capacity; power control, physical carrier sense turning, rate control, interference mitigation, and channel diversity. Study emerging issues such as supporting quality of service in wireless networks; security issues in wireless networks, broadband wireless access; wireless mesh networks; their integration with wired networks; vehicular ad hoc networks and related protocols. A project is required."
INSE 6441 "Applied Game Theory and Mechanism Design" "Fundamentals of game theory; equilibrium concepts; strategic games; extensive games; Bayesian games; game strategies in network security; game theory for trust and reputation; fundamentals of mechanism design; optimal mechanisms; efficient mechanisms; incentive compatibility; incentives and information security; revelation principle and trust; analysis tools; applications: security protocols, supply chain, trust and reputation, social networks. A project is required."
INSE 6510 "Video Game Technology and Development" "Prerequisite:COMP 5511 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.  This course is part development and part technology, and will cover the process of commercial video game development, and software design patterns used for game design. The course provides an in-depth understanding of how the game design process works. Students work with a game engine software framework to design and implement several kinds of games. Video game history. Basic Building blocks of a game. Elements of game design. Game Maker: objects, sprites, events. Space Shooter. Developing games with Games Factory. Real Time Strategy game development. A project is required."
INSE 6530 "3D Graphics and Computer Animation for Game Design" "Prerequisite:COMP 6761 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.  Application of 3D graphics and animation topics to non real-time rendered media. Current research topics in computer animation such as dynamic simulation of flexible and rigid objects, automatically-generated control systems, and evolution of behaviours. History of Animation. Animation Basics. Keyframe Animation. Path Animation. Non-Linear Animation. Modelling Concerns for Animation. Rigging for Forward and Inverse Kinematics. Morphing. Expressions. Particle Systems. Dynamics. A project is required."
INSE 6610 "Cybercrime Investigations" "Introduction to cybercrimes: unauthorized access, mischief to data, possession of hacking tools, possession of child pornography; Legal aspects: Canadian judicial system, computer crime laws, charter of rights, common law, mutual legal assistance treaty, search warrants, production and assistance orders, international laws, upcoming legal changes; Investigation process: search planning, acquisition methods, environment recognition, evidence identification; Reporting process: investigation and analysis reports, notes taking; authority of seizure; forensic interviews; Computer crime trials: witness preparation, court sentencing, rebuttal witness, cross-examination, testimony, credibility attacks; in-depth case studies. A project is required."
INSE 6620 "Cloud Computing Security and Privacy" "Prerequisite:INSE 6110 or equivalent.  Cloud computing concepts, SOA and cloud, virtualization and cloud, cloud service delivery models, cloud storage models, cloud deployment scenarios, public/ private/ hybrid/ community cloud, cloud computing architectures, SaaS, PaaS, IaaS, agility, scalability and elasticity of cloud, cloud security, cloud privacy, homomorphic encryption, searching encrypted cloud data, secure data outsourcing, secure computation outsourcing, proof of data possession / retrievability, virtual machine security, trusted computing in clouds, cloud-centric regulatory compliance, business and security risk models, cloud user security, identity management in cloud, SAML, applications of secure cloud computing."
INSE 6630 "Recent Developments in Information Systems Security" "Prerequisites:Any two of INSE 6110, INSE 6120, INSE 6130, or INSE 6140."
INSE 6640 "Smart Grids and Control System Security" "Overview of electric grid operation, evolution to the smart grid, smart grid components, dynamic pricing, promotion of green resources, governmental regulation, network standards, consumer privacy, risks to the smart grid, physical security and protections against tampering for smart grid environments, device level security, authorization and access control, consumer privacy protection, cryptographic mechanisms for smart grid environments, secure key management, communication security in smart grid, privacy of user data for Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), security standards for smart grid, supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA), SCADA architecture, SCADA Security, SCADA monitoring, SCADA systems for smart grids, distributed control systems (DCS), communication infrastructure. A project is required."
INSE 6650 "Trusted Computing" "Hardware and software root of trust; establishing and attesting trust of software systems; Trusted Platform Module (TPM); CPU support for trusted computing, including existing technologies such as Intel Trusted Execution Technology (TXT), AMD Secure Virtual Machine (SVM), ARM TrustZone; secure crypto processors such as Hardware Security Modules (HSMs); bank HSM APIs and their weaknesses; attestation protocols; OS support for trusted computing; security tokens (e.g., second factor of authentication, smartcards, transaction verification code); trusted user interface; use cases: digital rights management (DRM), authentication, protected execution of security sensitive code, trusted kiosk computing, full disk encryption, malware exploiting trusted computing infrastructure; hardware and software attacks; privacy issues. A project is required."
INSE 6660 "Secure Programming" "Topics include fundamentals of secure programming; string-related vulnerabilities and defence. Pointer-related vulnerabilities and defence; memory management-related vulnerabilities and defence. Integer-related security issues; formatted output-related security issues; concurrency-related security issues; security vulnerabilities and linking; security in sockets programming; security vulnerabilities and signals; file I/O security; best practices and coding standards; design principles for secure programming; model-based secure programming; static analysis for secure programming. A project is required."
INSE 6670 "Embedded Systems Security" "Topics of this course include embedded and real-time embedded systems; embedded systems security and trust; monitoring of embedded systems; security and protection objectives for hardware; adversaries, attacks; trusted integrated circuits (TIC); hardware assisted security and trust; process reliability and security; secure program execution on embedded processors; networks on chip; secure memory access; hardware trusted platforms; secure processors; efficient security processing; energy efficient security; cryptographic processors; physical one-way functions (POWF); PUF-based security; FSM model of computation; hiding information in FSM/IC piracy protection by active hardware metering; remote enabling and disabling of ICs; watermarking for intellectual property protection(IPP); physical and invasive attacks, side-channel attacks; zero knowledge proofs; FPGA security; FPGA fingerprinting and access; hardware trojan horses. Applications (automotive domain, internet of things, cyber-physical systems, SCADA, sensor networks). A project is required."
INSE 6680 "Systems Physical Security" "Topics of this course include identifying potential security threats and vulnerabilities, threat and risk assessment; security equipment and systems (access control and biometrics technology, surveillance systems, network infrastructure supporting security technology); physical security of information systems; maximizing the value of security systems; securing transported materials; emergency management and risk mitigation; critical infrastructure protection. Overview of the Canadian Operational Standard on Physical Security, Policy on Government Security and U.S. National Response Framework. A project is required."
INSE 691 "Topics in Information Systems Engineering" "Note:Subject will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g., INSE 691A, INSE 691B, etc."
INSE 6961 "Graduate Seminar in Information and Systems Engineering" "Students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering and submit a comprehensive report on the topics presented in three of the seminars. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis."
INSE 7100 "Design and Analysis of Security Protocols" "Prerequisite:COEN 6311 or equivalent.  The primary objective of this course is to present the methods used in the design and analysis of modern security protocols, introduction to existing cryptographic protocols. The most important security proprieties (such as authentication, secrecy, integrity, availability, atomicity, certified delivery and other properties), flaw taxonomy (such as freshness attacks, type attacks, parallel session attacks, implementation dependent attacks, binding attacks, encapsulation attacks and other forms of attack). Cryptographic protocol specification (general-purpose formal languages, logical languages, operational languages and security calculi). Cryptographic protocol analysis (security logics analysis, model-based and algebraic analysis, process algebra analysis, type based analysis). Limitations of formal methods and ad-hoc techniques, project will be offered in analyzing a number of published cryptographic protocols. The focus of this course will be on the design and the analysis of security protocols. A project is required."
INSE 7110 "Value Added Service Engineering in Next Generation Networks" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6861 or equivalent.  Telecommunications service engineering, or more simply service engineering, is the discipline that addresses the technologies and engineering process for the specification, implementation, testing, deployment, usage of value added services in telecommunication networks, value added services, or more simply services, can be defined as anything that goes beyond two party voice calls. They are either call related (e.g. call diversion, multiparty gaming, conducted conferences) or non-call related (e.g. customized stock quotes, web surfing from a cellular phone). Some services may combine call related and non-call related features (e.g. call centres). This course will cover the basics of service engineering (such as basic concepts, value added services, service life cycle, service engineering, intelligent networks, WAP/Imode/TINE-C). The basics of next generation networks (such as session initiation protocol (SIP), H.323, Megaco, H.248, 3GPP/3GPP2 architecture, softswitch). Signaling protocol-specific approaches (such as H.232 supplementary services, SIP CGI, SIP servlet API). Signaling protocol neutral approaches (such as CPL, JAIN JCC/JCAT, PARLAY; web services). Approaches at the research stage (such as context awareness; mobile code-based approaches). A project is required."
INSE 7120 "Advanced Network Management" "Prerequisite:ELEC 6861 or equivalent.  Network management  basics (history and basic definitions, management frameworks, functional areas). The simple network management protocol framework (history, protocol architecture, functional architecture, information architecture, RMON, management by delegation, distributed management and JASMIN NIB, case studies). OSI systems management, TNM and other frameworks (OSI communication, information and functional models, TMN functional, physical and information architecture, case study, CORBA based management, web based management, DTMF, JMX). Interoperability issue and in-depth study of a specific functional area overview of known techniques (e.g. dual MIBs), alarm filtering techniques (e.g. artificial intelligence), alarm correlation techniques (e.g. artificial intelligence, coding theory). Approaches still a research level (mobile agent based network management, active network based network management, policy based artwork management, use of SML/web services). A project is required."
INSE 8901 "Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis" "Students must complete a 25-credit thesis as part of their degree requirements. The thesis must represent the results of the students independent work after admission to the program. The proposed topic for the thesis, together with a brief statement outlining the proposed method of treatment, and the arrangement made for faculty supervision, must be approved by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee. For purposes of registration, this work will be designated as INSE 8901. The thesis will be evaluated by the students supervisor(s), and at least two examiners appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee, one of whom shall be external to the students department."
INDU 691 "Topics in Industrial Engineering" "Note:Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. INDU 691A, INDU 691B, etc."
INDU 6111 "Theory of Operations Research" "This course introduces the fundamentals of convex analysis such as polyhedral sets and the representation theorem. Advanced topics in linear optimization are also covered, such as state-of-the-art solution methods (revised and dual simplex methods, path following interior point methods), duality theory and parametric analysis, Farkas lemma, and KKT optimality conditions. An introduction to other advanced topics (Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition, dynamic programming, and stochastic decision processes) is given. A project is required."
INDU 6131 "Graph Theory with System Applications" "Basic concepts; trees, circuits and cutsets; Eulerian and Hamiltonian graphs; directed graphs; matrices of a graph, graphs and vector spaces; planarity and duality; connectivity, matching and colouring; flows in networks: max-flow min-cut theorem, minimum cost flows; optimization on graphs: minimum-cost spanning trees, optimum branching and shortest paths. Project: two hours per week."
INDU 6141 "Logistics Network Models (*)" "Prerequisite:INDU 6121.  This course covers the following wide range of operational issues in the transportation and logistics industry. Different analytical models and their solution strategies are also introduced.Overview of transportation systemsincludingairlines, railways, ocean liners, cargo, energy transportation and pipelines;Supply chain characterization;Site location;Distribution planning;Vehicle routing;Fleet scheduling;Crew scheduling;Demand management;Replenishment management;Revenue management;Geographic information systems;Real-time network control issues. A project is required."
INDU 6151 "Decision Models in Service Sector (*)" "Introduction to service strategy and operations. Service demand forecasting and development of new services. Service facility location and layout planning. Applications of decision models in service operations and service quality control. Cost analysis, queuing models, risk management and resource allocation models for service decisions. Service outsourcing and supply chain issues. Efficiency and effectiveness issues in different service sectors such as emergency force deployment, municipal resource allocation and health care. Case studies using operations research, operations management, and statistical techniques. A project is required."
INDU 6161 "Design and Operations of Supply Chain Networks" "Prerequisite:INDU 6121.  This course analyzes various supply chain operation issues from an engineering point of view. The course covers topics such as: supply chain issues and opportunities; performance evaluation of supply chains; supply chain planning and optimization; collaborative decision making in supply chains; transportation planning in supply chains; capacity planning in supply chains; designing global supply chains; risk management in supply chains; sustainable supply chain management. A project is required."
INDU 6221 "Lean Enterprise" "This course covers topics that are necessary to establish a lean culture at the system level in various organizations:Introduction to principles of the lean enterprise, process management, waste elimination and process variation, five Ss and workplace organization, lean analysis tools and performance measurements, Lean Six Sigma, enterprise value stream mapping, visual workplace, lean product development, lean business administration. A project is required."
INDU 6231 "Scheduling Theory" "Models for sequencing and scheduling activities including: static and dynamic problems; deterministic and stochastic models. Single machine processing; parallel machine processing; multistage problems including flow-shops and job-shops. Complexity issues. Exact and heuristic solution methods. Average and worst case performance analysis of heuristic methods. Applications in manufacturing environments. Current research trends. Project: two hours per week."
INDU 6241 "Lean Manufacturing" "Prerequisite:INDU 6211.  Introduction to the basic principles and concepts of lean manufacturing; tools of lean manufacturing, including value stream mapping, standardized work, setup reduction; mapping the current state; mixed model value streams; mapping the future state; Takt time, finished goods strategy, continuous flow, level pull, pacemaker, pitch, interval; implementing the future state. A project is required."
INDU 6251 "Facilities Planning and Warehouse Operations" "This course is designed to provide advanced concepts, theory and procedures for the study of facilities location, physical layouts, material flow, and material handling, warehouse operations planning and management systems, warehouse design, automation and control. Analytical procedures are developed to enhance the decision-making process in the design, rationalization and improvement of manufacturing or service facilities. The knowledge learned in this course is integrated with knowledge from related courses to develop a design project. A project is required."
INDU 6310 "Applied Probability and Statistics for Engineers" "This course introduces probability and statistics concepts frequently used in engineering applications. Probability theory, randomness, conditional probability, joint probability, independence and probability distributions are covered. Data collection, sampling, confidence intervals, hypothesis formulation, errors, estimation topics are given. Linear and non-linear regression, analysis of residuals and remedial measures, transformation of data, multiple, polynomial and weighted regression, model selection techniques, and joint confidence regions concepts are taught with relevant industry applications. Statistical packages are introduced. A project is required."
INDU 6311 "Discrete System Simulation" "Probability theory and queuing theory; discrete and continuous variables and their distributions; deterministic and stochastic models; building valid and credible models. Computer simulation of discrete-change systems subject to uncertainty techniques to verify quality of input data; analysis of output data; determination of simulation run-length and number of replications; random number generations, variance reduction techniques, transient and steady state behaviour; comparison of alternative systems. A project is required."
INDU 6321 "Introduction to Six Sigma(*)" "Prerequisite:INDU 6331.  Overview of the Six Sigma concept; Six Sigma deployment practice; Six Sigma methodologies for process improvement and process (DMAIC) and for product design (DMADV); Integration of Lean techniques in Six Sigma (Lean Six Sigma); Overview of different quality management tools applied in Six Sigma; Application of Designed of Experiments in Six Sigma; Design for Six Sigma through the application of the Robust Parameter Design; Six Sigma project management. A project is required."
INDU 6331 "Advanced Quality Control" "Introduction to advanced quality control and improvement concepts. Fundamentals of statistical methods and theoretical basis for quality control methods. Advanced and newly developed quality control and improvement methods such as modified and acceptance charts, multiple stream process control, control charts with adaptive sampling and engineering process control for quality. International standards of acceptance sampling. Economic design and implications of quality control and improvement procedures. A project is required."
INDU 6341 "Advanced Concepts in Quality Improvement (*)" "Note:Students who have taken MECH 6461 may not receive credit for this course."
INDU 6351 "System Reliability" "Review of probability theory; definition of various measures (reliability, availability, MTTF, etc.) and related probability distributions; reliability evaluation of redundant systems (series, parallel, series-parallel, bridge network, etc.); two and three parameter Weibull analysis; failure data analysis; trend analysis; goodness of fit test (Kolmogorov/Smirnov test); introduction of stress-strength modelling; homogeneous Markov models; reliability evaluation of cold, warm, and hot standby systems; introduction to reliability testing; case studies. Knowledge of a first course in probability theory is assumed. Project: two hours per week."
INDU 6361 "Discrete Optimization" "Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor."
INDU 6371 "Stochastic Optimization" "Prerequisite: INDU 6111.   Topics include an overview of stochastic optimization models; two-stage and multi-stage stochastic programming; algorithms for solving large-scale stochastic programming models, including sample average approximation (SAA), L-shaped method and scenario decomposition algorithms; robust optimization approach. A project is required. "
INDU 6381 "Applications of Reliability Engineering" "Topics include an introduction to reliability function; reliability program; failure; requirement allocation and design optimization; painless risk management; design optimization by test; validation; durability; stressstrength; nuisances and no fault found (NFF); operating with failure; fail-safe and operating with failure; real-time health monitoring. A project is required. "
INDU 6391 "Reliability and Maintenance for Design and Manufacturing" "Topics include fundamentals of product design and system validation methodologies to establish maintenance programs; design of experiment, test for design validation, pass/fail analysis, reliability growth models, reliability centred maintenance, test for manufacturing; accelerated life and stress tests; failure reporting, analysis and corrective action systems (FRACAS), maintenance programs, lifecycle analysis, end-of-life analysis and industrial approach for reliability; concepts and topics will be covered through real-life case studies. A project is required."
INDU 6411 "Human Factors Engineering (*)" "Elements of anatomy, physiology and psychology; auditory and visual display engineering; engineering anthropometry; human capabilities and limitations; manual material handling: design of work places, human-machine system design; shift work and jet lag; acquisition and retention of skill; toxicity and hazard; human reliability. A project on a current topicis required."
INDU 6421 "Systems Safety Engineering and Management" "Prerequisite: INDU 6310.  This course covers a variety of topics in safety engineering that provide the necessary knowledge and skills in order for engineers to design and manage systems where life-critical components will perform as expected, even when sub-components fail. Design concepts for safe operation with failure, design for human error and design for availability are introduced. Generic and safety dedicated engineering techniques are taught. Common safety management architectures for service and manufacturing systems, existing safety standards, guidelines in different industries, and their impact on the design processes across the life cycle of a product from initial concept to continuous certification are included. A project is required."
INDU 6521 "Quantitative Methods in Healthcare Systems (*) " "Prerequisite: INDU 6121.  Topics include mathematical modeling and optimization methods in healthcare problems, healthcare staff planning and scheduling, operating room management, and appointment scheduling in clinics. Other operational issues such as production and delivery of radio-pharmaceuticals, resource allocation and capacity planning in hospitals, ambulance redeployment and dispatching are discussed. Finally, system-level healthcare planning and management tools and methods such as routing and scheduling of caregivers in home-health industries, healthcare facility location, inventory management of blood products, kidney exchange optimization and optimization in radiation therapy (intensity-modulated radiation - IMRT and volumetric modulated arc therapy - VMAT) are introduced. A project is required."
INDU 6611 "Applied Industrial Systems Analytics" "Prerequisites:INDU 6121,6310."
INDU 6990 "Industrial Engineering Capstone" "Prerequisite: A minimum of 16 credits must be completed in the program.  A supervised design, simulation or experimental capstone design project in the students area of specialization. Students may work in groups to undertake:"
INDU 6991 "Engineering Management Industrial Stage I " "Prerequisite: A minimum of 16 credits must be completed in the program.  The Industrial Stage I is designed to provide students with the opportunity to complete an engineering management project in a company, governmental organization, or a NGO under the supervision of an organization partner and a faculty member. Students are required to provide a written report and give a seminar. "
INDU 6992 "Engineering Management Industrial Stage II" "Prerequisite: INDU 6991.  The Industrial Stage II is designed to provide students with the additional opportunity to complete the second engineering management project in a company, governmental organization, or a NGO under the supervision of an organization partner and a faculty member. Students are required to provide a written report and give a seminar."
MECH 6011 "Analysis and Design of Pneumatic Systems" "Principles and operating characteristics of fluidic elements; modelling of wall attachment; beam deflection; turbulent and vortex amplifiers; design and analysis of microdiaphram and diaphram ejector amplifiers; methods of evaluation performance characteristics of fluid devices; passive fluidic elements; digital and analog fluidic circuit theories and their applications; case studies of fluidic systems. A project on selected topicsis required."
MECH 6021 "Design of Industrial Control Systems (*)" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6101 or equivalent.  Analog and digital control system design. Analog controller design methods: lead and lag compensators, pole placement, model matching, two-parameter configuration, plant input/output feedback configuration. Introduction to state-space control system. State estimator and state feedback. Introduction to digital control system. Z-transform. Difference equations. Stability in the Z-domain. Digital implementation of analog controllers. Equivalent digital plant method. Alias signals. Selection of sampling time. PID controller. A project on specific topic or applicationsis required."
MECH 6041 "Virtual Systems Engineering" "Prerequisite:Permission of the instructor.  Theory and application of virtual systems with an emphasis on virtual prototyping of mechanical systems. Virtual system modelling: particle systems, rigid body systems, lumped parameter models, and multi-domain system modelling. Non-real-time simulation methods: numerical integration methods, stiff systems and implicit methods. Hardware-in-the-loop simulation (HIL): Real-time simulation, multi-rate simulation and scheduling. Stability, invariance, and robustness. Virtual environments. Distributed simulation and time delay analysis. Design and analysis of virtual engineering systems: specification, design, verification, validation and prototype testing. A project is required."
MECH 6051 "Process Dynamics and Control (*)" "Dynamics of mechanical and chemical processes: linear and nonlinear system capacity, resistance, piping complexes; characteristics and dynamics of control valves; process time constants; proportional, reset and derivative control actions; feed forward and cascade control, direct digital control case studies on design of level control; p-4 control and heat exchanger control; analysis of industrial hazards and security. A project on selected topics of current interestis required."
MECH 6061 "Analysis and Design of Hydraulic Control Systems (*)" "Introduction to fluid power control technology; fundamentals of fluid transmission media; basic hydraulic control system components and circuits; hydraulic servosystems; modelling and dynamic analysis of hydraulic systems  design examples; basic pneumatic control system components and circuits  design examples. A projects on selected topicsis required."
MECH 6081 "Fuel Control Systems for Combustion Engines" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6201.  Introduction to fuel control systems for combustion engines with fuel injection. Dynamics of fuel injection for steady-state and transient process; injection characteristics for different combustion patterns; speed and power control in relation to engine characteristics; design principles of fuel systems; special requirements for starting, shut-down, schedule modulation; testing methods; wear and reliability problems. Case studies include: multicylinder in-line injection pump, rotary distributor injection pump, mecano-pneumatic fuel control unit. Full term project work on alternative fuel delivery systems and emissions control for combustion engines. Modelling and simulation. Demonstration of alternative fuel injection system on diesel engine in lab."
MECH 6091 "Flight Control Systems" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6101 or equivalent.  Basics of flight dynamics modelling: axes systems and notation; equations of motion; aerodynamic forces and moments, airplane stability, aircraft on the ground; simulator flight model design. Flight instruments: classification; principles of operation, cockpit displays. Flight controls basics: configuration; control forces; primary and secondary controls. Introduction to automatic flight control: stability augmentation; autopilots; flight guidance and flight management systems; design examples. Flight simulation: classification; standards and regulations; system configuration and components. Projects on selected topics are required."
MECH 6101 "Kinetic Theory of Gases" "Equations of state for gases; molecular explanation of equations of state; introduction to quantum mechanics; the molecular theory of thermal energy and heat capacity; molecular velocity distribution, molecular collisions and the transport properties of gases, introduction to chemical kinetics. A project on specific topic or applicationsis required."
MECH 6111 "Gas Dynamics (*)" "Combined effects in one-dimensional flow; multidimensional flow; method of characteristics; one-dimensional treatment of non-steady gas dynamics; shock wave interactions; instability phenomena of supersonic intake diffusers; shock-boundary layer interactions. Projects on unsteady gas dynamics and on shock wave propagation and interactions are required."
MECH 6121 "Aerodynamics (*)" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6201.  Flow conservation equations, incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, inviscid irrotational and rotational flows: the Euler equations, the potential and stream function equations. Kelvin, Stokes and Helmholtz theorems. Elementary flows and their superposition, panel method for non-lifting bodies. Airfoil and wing characteristics, aerodynamics forces and moments coefficients. Flow around thin airfoils, Biot-Savart law, vortex sheets. Flow around thick airfoils, the panel method for lifting bodies. Flow around wings, Prandtls lifting line theory, induced angle and downwash, unswept wings, swept compressibility correction rules, the area rule. Transonic flow: small disturbance equation, full potential equation, supercritical airfoils. A project on specific topic or applicationsis required."
MECH 6131 "Conduction and Radiation Heat Transfer" "Solutions by analytical, numerical, and analogue methods of steady and transient temperature fields with and without heat sources; introduction to convection. Basic concepts and relations of radiation heat transfer, radiation of strongly absorbing media, and radiation of weakly absorbing media. A project on selected topicsis required."
MECH 6141 "Heat Exchanger Design" "Review of heat transfer and flow losses design consideration of heat exchangers double pipe exchanger shell and tube exchanger extended surfaces condenser, evaporator, regenerator, cooling tower. A project on selected topics is required."
MECH 6161 "Gas Turbine Design (*)" "Prerequisite:MECH 6171.  Study of practical criteria which influence the design of a gas turbine engine including relevant mechanical and aerodynamic constraints. The aerodynamics of each of the three major components of a modern turbo-fan engine, namely the compressor, the combustor and the turbine is considered. Air system acoustics, engine aerodynamic matching of components and modern performance testing methods. A design project is assigned for each of these components. A project on specific topic or applicationsis required."
MECH 6171 "Turbomachinery and Propulsion (*)" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6201.  Review of the gas turbine engine cycle and components arrangement. Types of turbo-propulsion for aircraft: turboprop, turbofan and turbojet. Energy transfer in incompressible and compressible turbomachines: the Euler equation, velocity triangles. Axial-flow compressors; mean-line analysis. Mechanisms of losses in turbomachines. Three-dimensional motion in turbomachines; the radial equilibrium equation and its numerical solution by finite difference methods. Dimensional analysis of incompressible and compressible flow in turbomachines, compressor and turbine performance maps; surge and stall. Centrifugal compressors. Axial-flow turbines. Prediction of performance of gas turbines, components matching. Projects on selected topics are required."
MECH 6181 "Heating, Air Conditioning and Ventilation (*)" "The effect of air temperature, humidity and purity on physiological comfort; overall heat transmission coefficients of building sections, air infiltration, ventilation and solar radiation loads; heating and air conditioning load calculations; heating, air conditioning and ventilating systems, equipment and controls; design of hot water piping and air distribution systems, pressure drop calculations; selection and specifications of mechanical equipment for heating, ventilation and air conditioning applications. A project on selected applicationsis required."
MECH 6191 "Combustion" "Prerequisite:MECH 6111.  Chemical thermodynamics; review of chemical kinetics; conservation equations for multicomponent reacting systems; detonation and deflagration of premixed materials; premixed laminar flames; gaseous diffusion flames, droplet combustion; turbulent flames; two-phase reacting systems; chemically reacting boundary layers. Projects on selected topics are required."
MECH 6231 "Helicopter Flight Dynamics" "Prerequisites:ENGR 6311 and MECH 6121, previously or concurrently."
MECH 6241 "Operational Performance of Aircraft" "Prerequisite:MECH 6121.  Introduction to fixed-wing aircraft operation. Flying environment and its measurement by aircraft instrumentation. Computation of lift and drag, effects of viscosity and compressibility. Review of piston, turboprop, turbojet and turbofan powerplants. Operational performance of aircraft in climb, cruise, descent and on ground. Advanced aircraft systems. Operational considerations in aircraft design. Projects on selected topics are required."
MECH 6251 "Space Flight Mechanics and Propulsion Systems" "Prerequisite:MECH 6111 or permission of the instructor.  Classification of space propulsion systems; Tsiolkovskijs equation; ideal rocket and nozzle design; flight performance; basic orbital mechanics; chemical propellant rocket performance analysis; fundamentals of liquid and solid propellant rocket motors; electric, solar, fusion thruster. A project is required."
MECH 6301 "Vibration Problems in Rotating Machinery" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6311.  Torsional vibrations critical speeds, rotors driven by reciprocating machines, finite element modelling, whirling of shafts, gyroscopic effects, rotors on fluid film bearings, instability in torsional and bending vibrations, balancing, response to support excitations, condition monitoring. Projects on selected applications are required."
MECH 6311 "Noise and Vibration Control" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6311.  Introduction to noise and vibration, measurement units. Review of wave theory, noise control criteria and standards, sources and nature of mechanical equipment noise, devices for noise control such as silencers, baffles and acoustic enclosures. Machinery vibration sources, radiation of noise from vibrating structures, devices and methods for vibration control such as isolators, dampers, absorbers and in-situ balancing. Active control of noise and vibration. Projects on selected applications are required."
MECH 6321 "Optimum Design of Mechanical Systems" "Survey of practical methods for optimum design of mechanical systems; optimal performance criteria and selection of design variables. Introduction to analytical and numerical optimization methods for single- and multi-variable unconstrained problems: direct search and gradient methods. Constrained optimization. Optimality criterion techniques for mechanical systems. Case studies in the area of machine tools, structural systems, machine element design, vehicle design, and hydraulic control systems. Discussion on commercial software packages, their capability, availability and limitations. An optimization project on selected topicsis required."
MECH 6341 "Engineering Analysis of Smart Materials and Structures" "Topics include introduction to smart materials and structures; overview of mathematical models for mechanical and electrical systems; mathematical representation of smart systems; piezoelectric materials and their constitutive equations; electromechanical coupling in piezoelectric based systems and structures and their governing equations; shape memory alloys and their constitutive models; electrical activation of shape memory alloys and their dynamic modelling; electrorheological (ER) and magnetorheological (MR) fluids and elastomers; constitutive models for ER and MR fluids and elastomers; dynamic modelling and vibration analysis of ER and MR based adaptive devices and structures; application of smart materials as energy dissipating elements in structural systems for passive, semi-active and active vibration control; application of smart materials in motion control. A project is required."
MECH 6351 "Modal Analysis of Mechanical Systems" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6311.  Natural frequencies and normal modes of multi-degree-of-freedom systems; orthogonality of normal modes; eigenvalue and eigenvector extraction methods; vibration response using normal mode analysis; complex natural frequencies and complex modes in damped systems, modal damping random response considerations; nonsymmetric systems using biorthogonality relations; modal parameter identification from tests, application of modal analysis to mechanical systems. Projects on selected applications are required."
MECH 6361 "Mechanics of Biological Tissues" "The course deals with mechanical behaviour of tissues in human body such as bone, cartilage, ligaments, tendons, blood vessels, muscles, skin, teeth, nerves. Classification of biological tissues; mechanical properties in vivo and in vitro testing; constitutive relationships, viscoelastic behaviour and rate/time dependency; remodelling and adaption due to mechanical loading; analogous mechanical systems. A project on current topicis required."
MECH 6421 "Metal Machining and Surface Technology" "Theoretical and practical aspects of mechanics and dynamics of metal machining; tool geometry in machine and working reference systems with their transformation matrices; machinability; wear; cutting forces; temperature distribution; tool material unconventional machining; machining economics; optimizing techniques for cutting conditions; surface mechanics and application of random processes. A project on selected topicsis required."
MECH 6431 "Introduction to Tribology (Wear, Friction and Lubrication)" "Contact between stationary surfaces; dry friction; rolling contract; wear; boundary lubrication; lubricating oils and greases; hydrodynamic journal bearings; case studies in Tribology as applied to design and manufacturing problems. A project on specific topic or applicationsis required."
MECH 6441 "Stress Analysis in Mechanical Design" "Stress analysis for design of elastic and visco-elastic mechanical components subject to thermal, fatigue, vibrational and chemical environments; buckling and creep; cumulative damage. Case studies, and project from selected applications are required."
MECH 6451 "Computer-Aided Mechanical Design" "Concept of value and decision theory in design; design application and case studies in the implementation of digital computer-oriented design of engineering systems. Examples include design of specific machine elements, design of vehicle suspension, hydraulic positioning systems, ship propulsion system, multi-speed gear box, and cam drives. Introduction to identification, optimization, and parameter sensitivity. Implementation of these methods uses remote terminals and graphic display units. A project is required."
MECH 6471 "Aircraft Structures" "Prerequisite:MECH 6441 or equivalent.  Aero/performance aspects of aircraft structures; Airworthiness and design considerations; Materials; Static, vibratory and aeroelastic loadings; Propulsion-induced loadings; Functions and fabrication of structural components; Stress analysis of wings, fuselages, stringers, fuselage frames, wing ribs, cut-outs in wings and fuselages, and laminated structures; Buckling of aircraft structures: local buckling, instability of stiffened panels; flexural-torsional buckling; Fracture and fatigue failures. Case studies."
MECH 6481 "Aeroelasticity(*)" "Aerodynamic loading of elastic airfoils; phenomenon of divergence; effect of flexible control surface on divergence of main structure; divergence of one- and two-dimensional wing models; phenomenon of flutter; flutter of two- and three-dimensional wings; approximate analysis techniques; flutter prevention and control; panel flutter in high speed vehicles; flutter of turbomachine bladings; vortex induced oscillations; bridge buffeting. A project on specific applicationsis required."
MECH 6491 "Engineering Metrology and Measurement Systems" "Introduction to metrology, linear and geometric tolerancing, non-optical and optical methods in form measurement, fundamentals of optical metrology, interferometry - theory and overview, Moir and phase shifting interfereometry, speckle interferometry and holography, light sources, detectors and imaging systems. Applications to precision measurement, Doppler vibrometry and dynamic characterization, applications to MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems), and special topics include: nanometrology, X-ray interferometry and interference spectroscopy. A project is required."
MECH 6501 "Advanced Materials" "Advanced composites. Polymer matrix composites. Resins and fibers. Metal matrix composites. Ceramic matrix composites. Interfaces. Mechanical properties. Applications. A project on selected topics of current interestis required."
MECH 6511 "Mechanical Forming of Metals (*)" "Mechanisms of plastic deformation at ambient and elevated temperatures; plasticity theory; mechanical forming processes; forging; rolling; extrusion; wire drawing; deep drawing; bending; results of processing; mechanical properties; residual stresses; fibrous textures and preferred orientations; effects of annealing. Process modelling by shearline or finite element analysis. A project on current research topics and selected applicationsis required."
MECH 6521 "Manufacturing of Composites (*)" "Hand lay-up. Autoclave curing. Compression molding. Filament winding. Resin transfer molding. Braiding. Injection molding. Cutting. Joining. Thermoset and thermoplastic composites. Process modelling and computer simulation. Nondestructive evaluation techniques. A project on selected topics of current interestis required."
MECH 6531 "Casting" "Phase equilibrium diagrams; mechanisms of solidification; design of castings for various moulding processes, section sizes, dimensional accuracies and surface finishes; continuous casting; control of grain size; segregation and porosity. Defects in castings. A project on current research topic and selected applicationsis required."
MECH 6541 "Joining Processes and Nondestructive Testing" "Principles of joining; fusion welding; arc, torch, plasma, electron beam, resistance, etc; solid state welding; heterogeneous hot joining (brazing, soldering); heterogeneous cold joining; metallurgy of joints; joint properties; nondestructive testing processes; radiography, ultrasonic, magnetic particle, die penetrant, etc. A project on current research topic or selected applicationsis required."
MECH 6551 "Fracture" "Fracture mechanisms; ductile and cleavage; brittle fracture; notch effects; propagation of cracks; ductile-brittle transition; inter-granular fracture; hydrogen embrittlement; fatigue initiation mechanisms; crack propagation; preventive design; creep failure, mechanisms maps, fatigue; pore formation; grain boundary sliding; high temperature alloys, testing techniques; fractography. A project on current research topics and selected applicationsis required."
MECH 6561 "High Strength Materials" "Studies of the microstructures responsible for high strength and of the thermomechanical treatments producing these microstructures; dislocation theory; strain hardening; strengthening by solid-solution, massive hard phases, precipitation, dispersed particles, and martensitic and bainitic structures; fibre and particulate composites; surface treatments; residual stresses of thermal or mechanical origin. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required."
MECH 6571 "Corrosion and Oxidation of Metals" "Electrochemical corrosion and preventative measures. Stress corrosion, corrosion fatigue. Oxidation at low and high temperatures and protective measures. Selection of alloys and coatings. A project on current research topic or selected applicationsis required."
MECH 6581 "Mechanical Behaviour of Polymer Composite Materials (*)" "General applications of polymer composite materials in the aircraft, aerospace, automobile, marine, recreational and chemical processing industries. Different fibres and resins. Mechanics of a unidirectional lamina. Transformation of stress, strain, modulus and compliance. Off-axis engineering constants, shear and normal coupling coefficients. In-plane and flexural stiffness and compliance of different laminates including cross-ply, angle-ply, quasi-isotropic and general bidirectional laminates. Strength of laminates and failure criteria. Micro-mechanics. Projects on selected applications are required."
MECH 6601 "Testing and Evaluation of Polymer Composite Materials and Structures" "Theory and practice for the determination of tensile, compression and shear properties of composite materials; techniques for the determination of physical and chemical properties; non-destructive techniques such as ultrasonics, acousto-ultrasonics, acoustic emission, infrared and lasers for evaluation of composite structures. A project on selected topics of current interestis required."
MECH 6611 "Numerically Controlled Machines" "Prerequisite:MECH 6451 or equivalent.  Positioning and contouring NC machines, typical NC applications; analysis of typical NC systems and design considerations; components. A design project on multi-surface machine partsis required."
MECH 6621 "Microprocessors and Applications (*)" "Prerequisite:A course in industrial electronics or permission of the instructor.  Introduction to the concepts and practices of using microprocessors and micro-computers in such applications as instrumentation, manufacturing, control and automation; architecture and programming techniques; interface logic circuits; I/O systems; case studies of mechanical engineering applications. A project on specific topic or applicationsis required."
MECH 6631 "Industrial Automation" "Introduction to mechanization of industrial processes such as machining, material handling, assembling, and quality control; selection of actuators and sensors for mechanization; design of sequential control circuits using classical methods, ladder diagram, travel-step diagram and cascade method; specifying control sequences using GRAFCET and FUP; special purpose circuits such as emergency circuits, timers, and programmable logic controllers (PLCs); case studies dealing with typical industrial manufacturing processes and computer simulation. A project on specific topic or applicationsis required."
MECH 6641 "Engineering Fracture Mechanics and Fatigue" "Fracture mechanics and fatigue of machine elements and structures; Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM); Elastic Plastic Fracture Mechanics (EPFM); Finite Element Analysis for fracture; LEFM and EPFM Testing; Fracture mechanics approach to fatigue crack growth problem; Constant-amplitude, variable-amplitude and stochastic loading cases; Industrial applications to mechanical design and fracture and fatigue control in machine elements and structures; Damage tolerance design. A case study or project on selected applicationsis required."
MECH 6651 "Structural Composites" "Analysis for design of beams, columns, rods, plates, sandwich panels and shells made of composites; anisotropic elasticity; energy methods; vibration and buckling; local buckling in sandwich structures; free edge effects and delamination; joining; and failure considerations in design. A project on selected applicationsis required."
MECH 6661 "Thermodynamics and Phase Equilibria of Materials" "Thermodynamic laws and relationships. Partial and relative state functions: Activities in multicomponent systems, reference and standard states, solution thermodynamics. Thermodynamics of phase transformations and chemical reactions in engineering materials. Calculation of thermodynamic functions and properties. Experimental methods of determining thermodynamic properties. Multicomponent and multiphasic systems. Generalized phase rules, phase diagrams, stability diagrams and other diagram types. Computational thermodynamics for developing engineering materials. A project is required."
MECH 6671 "Finite Element Method in Machine Design" "Prerequisite:MECH 6441.  Role of Finite element method in machine design. Variational principles. Formulation of the finite element problem in stress, vibration and buckling analyses of machine components. Different elements and interpolation functions. Application in machine design; fracture. A case study or project on selected applicationsis required."
MECH 6681 "Dynamics and Control of Nonholonomic Systems" "Kinematics of nonholonomic systems; dynamics of nonholonomic systems, including dlembert principle, Euler-Lagrange equations; equations of motion of nonholonomic systems with Lagrangian multipliers; the reaction of ideal nonholonomic constraints; nonholonomic Caplygin systems; Bifurcation and stability analysis of the nonholonomic systems. Analysis and design of nonlinear control of nonholonomic systems, including kinematic control and dynamic control as well as force control. Controller designs with uncertain nonholonomic systems. Application examples including control of wheeled mobile robots and walking robots. A project is required."
MECH 6691 "Optical Microsystems" "Microfabrication and micromachining required for optical microsystems; optical microsystem modelling, simulation, sensitivity analysis. Properties of materials suitable for optical MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems). Measurements, sensing and actuation suitable for optical microsystems. Introduction to micro-optical components; optical waveguide-based systems. Design of different optical MEMS devices. Chemical and biochemical sensing with optical microsystems. Assembly, packaging and testing of optical MEMS devices. A projectis required."
MECH 6741 "Mechatronics(*)" "Introduction to mechatronics; basic elements of mechatronic systems. Measurement systems: including principles of measurement systems; sensors and transducers; signal conditioning processes and circuits; filters and data acquisition. Actuation systems: mechanical actuation systems and electrical actuation systems. Controllers: control modes; PID controller; performance measures; introduction to digital controllers and robust control. Modelling and analysis of mechatronic systems; performance measures; frequency response; transient response analysis; stability analysis. A project is required."
MECH 6751 "Vehicle Dynamics (*)" "Tire-terrain interactions; side-slip; cornering and aligning properties of tires: camber angle and camber torque; estimation of braking-tractive and cornering forces of tires; steady-state handling of road vehicles: steering response and directional stability; handling and directional response of vehicles with multiple steerable axles: handling of articulated vehicles: handling and directional response of tracked and wheeled off-road vehicles; directional response to simultaneous braking and steering. A project on research topicsis required."
MECH 6761 "Vehicular Internal Combustion Engines (*)" "Mechanical design of vehicular engines; gas exchange and combustion engine processes; combustion chambers design; fuels and fuel supply; ignition and control systems; cooling and lubrication of engines; emissions formation and control; engine operational characteristics - matching with vehicles; enhancement of engine performance; engine testing; environmental impact of vehicular engines; recent developments in energy-efficient and clean engines. Design of calculation project of vehicular engine. Project work on alternative fuel delivering systems and emissions control for combusion engines. Modelling and simulation. Demonstration of alternative fuel injection system on diesel engine in lab."
MECH 6771 "Driverless Ground Vehicles (*)" "Definition and classifications; case studies of major industrial and research vehicle prototypes; applications; kinematic modelling for feedback control of a driverless vehicle as a planar rigid body; vehicle motion and its relation to steering and drive rates of its wheels; co-ordinate systems assignment; transformation matrices; condition for rolling without skidding and sliding; sensor models and sensor integrations; dead-reckoning control; global and local path planning; introduction to dynamic modelling of driverless vehicle with and without the dynamics of wheel assemblies; design of optimal controllers; introduction to adaptive neuro-morphic controller. Projects are an integral part of the course for which the following may be used: TUTSIM, FORTRAM, or C. A project on selected topicsis required."
MECH 6781 "Guided Vehicle Systems (*)" "Definition and classification of guided transportation systems; track characterization: alignment, gage, profile and cross-level irregularities; wheel-rail interactions: rolling contact theories, creep forces; modelling of guided vehicle components; wheelset, suspension, truck and car body configurations, suspension characteristics; performance evaluation: stability/hunting, ride quality; introduction to advanced guided vehicles. A project on selected topics is an integral part of the course."
MECH 6791 "Aircraft Hydro-Mechanical and Fuel Systems (*)" "Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.  This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: hydraulic system, primary and secondary flight control actuation systems, landing gear systems, and fuel system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation are covered. A project is required."
MECH 6891 "Aircraft Pneumatic and Electrical Power Systems (*)" "Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.  This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: electrical power system, auxiliary and emergency power systems, environmental control system, ice and rain protection system, and pneumatic power system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation are covered. A project is required, including a laboratory component."
MECH 691 "Topics in Mechanical Engineering I" "See Note inTopic Area E02"
MECH 6941 "Concurrent Engineering in Aerospace Systems" "Introduction: objectives, definitions, impact on product development; process modelling and optimization; forming of engineering team; selection of techniques, methodology and tools; market design focus vs. quality design focus; development time management; process integration; aerospace case studies/projects, future trends."
MECH 6961 "Aerospace Case Study I" "SeeMechanical &amp; Industrial Engineeringsection."
MECH 6971 "Aerospace Case Study II" "SeeMechanical &amp; Industrial Engineeringsection."
MECH 7011 "Dynamics of Hydraulic Control Systems" "Prerequisites:MECH 6021, 6061."
MECH 7101 "Convection Heat Transfer" "Prerequisite:ENGR 6201.  Heat transfer in laminar flow, review of the differential and integral forms of the general energy equation for boundary layer regimes; solution of the energy equation for free convection, forced convection and heat transfer in entrance regions. Heat transfer in turbulent flow; review of the energy equation for turbulent flow; momentum-heat transfer analogies; experimental results for forced convection, free convection, and combined free and forced convection. Project or term paper required."
MECH 7501 "Design Using Composite Materials" "Prerequisite:MECH 6581.  General concept involving design using composite materials. Integral approach to design. Selection of materials. Selection of fabrication techniques. Computer-aided design tools. Consideration for fracture, fatigue, buckling and impact. Joining consideration. Design of tubes, beams, columns. Design of aircraft components. A project on selected topics is required."
MECH 7511 "Vehicle Vibration and Control" "Dynamic modelling of ground vehicles for analysis of ride performance; ride comfort and safety criteria; modelling of human body; characterization of road inputs; modelling and design of vibration isolators: primary suspension, secondary suspension; active, semi-active and passive isolators; kinematic and dynamic analysis of suspension linkages; laboratory methods for performance evaluation of vehicle suspension systems; software packages and case studies. Projects on selected applications are required."
MECH 7711 "Handling and Stability of Road Vehicles" "Prerequisite:MECH 6751 or equivalent.  Mathematical methods in vehicle dynamics; tire and suspension modelling and design for handling; static roll; steady turning and off-tracking analysis of straight and articulated road vehicles; directional stability and braking analysis; directional response of articulated vehicles with steerable axles; software packages and case studies. Project on selected topics is an integral part of the course."
MECH 791 "Topics in Mechanical Engineering II" "See Note inTopic Area E02"
MECH 8011 "Doctoral Seminar in Mechanical Engineering (***)" "Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value."
COMP 691 "Topics in Computer Science I " "COMP 791 Topics in Computer Science II"
COMP 6231 "Distributed System Design " "COMP 6281 Parallel Programming (*)"
COMP 6411 "Comparative Study of Programming Languages" "COMP 6421 Compiler Design (*) "
COMP 6521 "Advanced Database Technology and Applications" "COMP 6591 Introduction to Knowledge-Base Systems "
COMP 6351 "Topics in Scientific Computation" "COMP 6361 Numerical Analysis of Nonlinear Equations"
COMP 6531 "Foundations of the Semantic Web" "COMP 6721 AppliedArtificial Intelligence"
SOEN 691 "Topics in Software Engineering I" "SOEN 791 Topics in Software Engineering II"
SOEN 6441 "Advanced Programming Practices" "SOEN 6751 Human Computer Interface Design"
SOEN 6311 "Formal Methods" "SOEN 6461 Software Design Methodologies"
SOEN 6431 "Software Comprehension and Maintenance" "SOEN 6491 Software Refactoring"
SOEN 6011 "Software Engineering Processes" "SOEN 6021 Software Re-engineering"
SOEN 6761 "Multimedia Computing" "SOEN 6951 Software Engineering Case Study"
COMP 6961 "Graduate Seminar in Computer Science" "COMP 6971 Project and Report(4 credits)"
ENCS 8011 "PhD Seminar " "ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal (6 credits)"
COMP 6231 "Distributed System Design" "Principles of distributed computing: scalability, transparency, concurrency, consistency, fault tolerance. Client-server interaction technologies: interprocess communication, sockets, group communication, remote procedure call, remote method invocation, object request broker, CORBA, web services. Distributed server design techniques: process replication, fault tolerance through passive replication, high availability through active replication, coordination and agreement transactions and concurrency control. Designing software fault-tolerant highly available distributed systems using process replication. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 6281 "Parallel Programming (*)" "Migration from Von Neumann to parallel processing architectures: shared-memory and message-passing paradigms; massively parallel computers; recent trends in commodity parallel processing; clusters, multi-core, CPU-GPU based heterogeneous computing. Issues of memory consistency and load balancing. Parallel algorithms for shared-memory and message passing platforms; efficiency and scalability; issues of performance overhead. Parallel programming environments: parallel programming models; languages; software tools. Laboratory: two hours per week. A project is required."
COMP 6311 "Animation for Computer Games (*)" "Prerequisite:COMP 6761 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.  Introduction to the algorithms, data structures, and techniques used in modelling and rendering dynamic scenes. Topics include principles of traditional animation, production pipeline, animation hardware and software, orientation representation and interpolation, modelling physical and articulated objects, forward and inverse kinematics, motion control and capture, key-frame, procedural, and behavioural animation, camera animation, scripting system, and free-form deformation. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 6321 "Machine Learning" "Introduction to the fundamentals of machine learning. Linear models: linear and polynomial regression, overfitting, model selection, logistic regression, naive Bayes. Non-linear models: decision trees, instance-based learning, boosting, neural networks. Support vector machines and kernels. Computational learning theory. Experimental methodology, sources of error. Structured models: graphical models, deep belief networks. Unsupervised learning: k-means, mixture models, density estimation, expectation maximization, principle component analysis, eigenmaps and other dimensionality reduction methods. Learning in dynamical systems: hidden Markov models and other types of temporal/sequence models. Reinforcement learning. Survey of machine learning and its applications. A project is required.Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 6331 "Advanced Game Development (*)" "Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.  Introduction to advanced aspects of computer games. Game engine design. Artificial Intelligence (AI): nonplayer character movement, coordinated movement, pathfinding, world representations; decision making; tactical AI, strategic AI, learning in games. Physicsbased techniques: collision detection and response. Networked gaming: multiplayer games, networking and distributed game design, mobile gaming. Improving realism: cut scenes, 3D sound. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 6341 "Computer Vision (*)" "This course introduces basic techniques and concepts in computer vision includingimage formation, grouping and fitting, geometric vision, recognition, perceptualorganization, and the state-of-the art software tools. Students learn fundamentalalgorithms and techniques, and gain experience in programming vision-basedcomponents; in particular, how to program in OpenCV, a powerful software interfaceused to process data captured from passive and active sensors. A project is required.Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 6351 "Topics in Scientific Computation" "Selected elements of numerical methods that are central to scientific computation. The precise contents of the course may differ somewhat from one offering to the next, but will include the following topics: An introduction to the numerical solution of nonlinear equations, continuation methods, numerical solution of initial value problems in ordinary differential equations, finite difference method, numerical stability theory, stiff equations, boundary value problems in ordinary differential equations, collocation methods, introduction to the numerical solution of partial differential equations, with emphasis on nonlinear diffusion problems. A project is required."
COMP 6361 "Numerical Analysis of Nonlinear Equations" "An introduction to numerical algorithms for nonlinear equations, including discrete as well as continuous systems. The emphasis is on computer-aided numerical analysis rather than numerical simulation. This course is suitable for scientists and engineers with a practical interest in nonlinear phenomena. Topics include computational aspects of: homotopy and continuation methods, fixed points and stationary solutions, asymptotic stability, bifurcations, periodic solutions, transition to chaos, conservative systems, travelling wave solutions, discretization techniques. A variety of applications will be considered. Numerical software packages will be available. A project is required."
COMP 6411 "Comparative Study of Programming Languages" "COMP 6421 Compiler Design (*) (4 credits)"
COMP 6461 "Computer Networks and Protocols" "Direct link networks: encoding, framing, error detection, flow control, example networks. Packet switching and forwarding: bridges, switches. Internetworking: Internet Protocol, routing, addressing, IPv6, multicasting, mobile IP. End-to-end protocols: UDP, TCP. Network security concepts. Application-level protocols. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 6521 "Advanced Database Technology and Applications" "Review of standard relational databases, query languages. Query processing and optimization. Parallel and distributed databases. Information integration. Data warehouse systems. Data mining and OLAP. Web databases and XML Active and logical databases, spatial and multimedia data management. Laboratory: Two hours per week."
COMP 6531 "Foundations of the Semantic Web" "Web markup languages, World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) standards, Extensible Markup Language (XML) Resource Description Framework (RDF), schema for markup languages, Semantic Web, ontology development, markup languages for ontologies, Web Ontology Language (OWL), logical foundations of ontologies, description logics, reasoning with ontologies. A project is required."
COMP 6591 "Introduction to Knowledge-Base Systems" "Review of first-order logic, relational algebra, and relational calculus. Fundamentals of logic programming. Logic for knowledge representation. Architecture of a knowledge-base system. Fundamentals of deductive databases. Top-down and bottom-up query processing. Some important query processing strategies and their comparison. Project or term paper on current research topics."
COMP 6621 "Discrete Mathematics of Paul Erds" "Introduction to the methods and proof techniques of Paul Erds that are particularly applicable to Computer Science. Proof of Bertrands postulate. The Erds-Szekeres and the de Bruijn-Erds theorems. Ramseys theorem and Ramsey numbers. Van der Waerdens theorem and Van der Waerden numbers. Delta-systems and a proof of the Erds-Lovsz conjecture. The Erds-Ko-Rado theorem. Extremal graph theory. Random graphs and graph colouring. The probabilistic method and its applications in theoretical Computer Science. A project is required."
COMP 6631 "Large-Scale Optimization" "Mathematical modelling of large-scale optimization models. Design and implementation of large-scale optimization techniques: decomposition methods (Benders, Dantzig-Wolfe, Lagrangian Relaxation, Column Generation), branch-and-price techniques. Large-scale linear and non-linear programming techniques for network optimization and integer/discrete programming. Techniques for nonlinear non-convex continuous optimization: branch-and-bound methods, DC (difference of convex functions) programming, bilinear and biconvex optimization. Heuristics and meta-heuristics. A project is required."
COMP 6641 "Theory of Computation" "General properties of algorithmic computations. Turing machines, universal Turing machines. Turing computable functions as a standard family of algorithms. Primitive recursive functions. Churchs thesis, recursive sets. Recursively enumerable sets and their properties. Rices theorem. Time and space complexity measures. Hierarchy of complexity measures. Advanced topics in complexity theory. A project is required."
COMP 6651 "Algorithm Design Techniques" "Mathematical preliminaries; Empirical and theoretical measures of algorithm efficiencies; Optimization and combinatorial techniques and algorithms including greedy algorithms, dynamic programming, branch-and-bound techniques and graph network algorithms; Amortized complexity analysis; String matching algorithms; NP-complete problems and approximate solutions; Probabilistic algorithms. A project is required."
COMP 6661 "Combinatorial Algorithms" "Representation and generation of combinatorial objects; search techniques; counting and estimation. Projects on selected applications from combinatorics and graph theory."
COMP 6711 "Computational Geometry" "Efficient algorithms and data structures to solve geometric problems. Problems discussed include convex hulls, line intersections, polygon triangulation, point location, range searching, Voronoi diagrams, Delaunay triangulations, interval trees and segment trees, arrangements, robot motion planning, binary space partitions, quadtrees, and visitility. Algorithmic methods include plane sweep, incremental insertion, randomization, divide and conquer. Emphasis will be given to computation and complexity, with applications in computer graphics, computer aided design, geographic information systems, networks, mesh generation, databases, and robot motion planning. A project is required."
COMP 6721 "Applied Artificial Intelligence (*)" "The course covers heuristic and adversarial searches for concrete applications. It then discusses automated reasoning, advanced knowledge representation and dealing with uncertainly for Artificial Intelligence applications. Finally, it introduces autoencoders, recurrent neural networks and sequence to sequence models. A project is required.Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 6731 "Pattern Recognition (*)" "Pre-processing. Feature extraction and selection. Similarity between patterns and distance measurements. Syntactic and statistical approaches. Clustering analysis. Bayesian decision theory and discriminant functions. Clustering and classification techniques. Applications. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 6741 "Intelligent Systems (*)" "Knowledge representation and reasoning. Uncertainty and conflict resolution. Design of intelligent systems. Grammar-based, rule-based, and blackboard architectures. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 6751 "Natural Language Analysis" "Introduction to natural language processing. Structure of English. Grammars and parsing. Lexical and compositional semantics. Pragmatic issues. Applications in text mining and information extraction. A project is required."
COMP 6761 "Advanced 3D Graphics for Game Programming" "Fundamental algorithms, techniques, and software engineering principles for 3D graphics. Introduction to real-time graphics application architecture; review of basic 3D concepts of modelling, viewing, and rendering. 3D graphics functions, pipeline, and performance. Hierarchical 3D graphics. Algorithms for occlusion culling, collision detection, photorealism, shadows, and textures. Current trends and state-of-the-art graphics and physics algorithms. Laboratory: Two hours per week."
COMP 6771 "Image Processing (*) " "Digital image fundamentals; image enhancement: histogram processing, filtering in the spatial domain, filtering in the frequency domain; image restoration and reconstruction; image segmentation: line detection, Hough transform, edge detection and linking, thresholding, region splitting and merging; image compression; introduction to wavelet transform and multi-resolution processing. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 6781 "Statistical Natural Language Processing" "The course covers robust methods to natural language processing (NLP) and their applications to manipulate large text collections. Topics covered in this course include: Zipfs law, information retrieval, statistical machine translation, N-gram language models and smoothing techniques, word sense disambiguation, part-of-speech tagging and probabilistic grammars and parsing. A project is required."
COMP 6791 "Information Retrieval and Web Search (*)" "Basics of information retrieval (IR): Boolean, vector space and probabilistic models. Tokenization and creation of inverted files. Weighting schemes. Evaluation of IR systems: precision, recall, E-measure. Relevance feedback and query expansion. Application of IR to Web search engines: XML, link analysis, PageRank algorithm. Text categorization and clustering techniques as used in spam filtering. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 6811 "Bioinformatics Algorithms" "The principal objectives of the course are to cover the major algorithms used in bioinformatics; sequence alignment, multiple sequence alignment, phylogeny; classifying patterns in sequences; secondary structure prediction; 3D structure prediction; analysis of gene expression data. This includes dynamic programming, machine learning, simulated annealing, and clustering algorithms. Algorithmic principles will be emphasized. A project is required."
COMP 6821 "Bioinformatics Databases and Systems" "The principal objectives of the course are to survey the needs of bioinformatics for data management, knowledge management, and computational support; to provide in-depth description of an example of each kind of database and system; and to introduce advanced database technology and software technology relevant to the needs of bioinformatics. A project is required."
COMP 691 "Topics in Computer Science I" "Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g., COMP 691A, COMP 691B, etc."
COMP 6961 "Graduate Seminar in Computer Science" "Students will have to attend a selected set of departmental seminars and submit a comprehensive report on the topics presented in one of the seminars. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis."
COMP 6971 "Project and Report" "Prerequisite: Completion of 16 credits; a CGPA of 3.40 or greater; permission of the Department.  See Requirements for the Master of/Magisteriate in Applied Computer Science (MApCompSc) section. Project: 8 hours per week."
COMP 7241 "Parallel Algorithms and Architectures" "Prerequisite: COMP 6281 or permission of instructor.  Parallel architectures; memory organization, interconnection structures, data routing techniques. Parallel algorithms; paradigms and design techniques, complexity analysis, algorithms for various computation models. A project is required."
COMP 7251 "Mobile Computing and Wireless Networks" "Prerequisite: COMP 6461.  Introduction to mobile computing and wireless networks:local (LAN), personal (PAN) and metropolitan (MAN). Mobile ad hoc networks and sensor networks. Algorithms and protocols for medium access, routing, topology control, and reliable transport. A project is required."
COMP 7451 "Semantics of Programming Languages" "Prerequisite: COMP 6411.  The need for semantic descriptions of programming languages. Classification of semantics: operational, axiomatic, model-theoretic, algebraic, denotational. Classification of languages: procedural, functional, logic, equational. Applications: verification, construction, language design, temporal logic for distributed systems, semantics for advanced languages."
COMP 7521 "Cryptography and Data Security" "Prerequisite:COMP 6651.  Traditional cryptography. Information theory. Private-key (symmetric-key) and public-key (asymmetric-key) cryptographic algorithms. Advanced Encryption Standard (Rijndael). Cryptographic hash functions. Digital signatures. Data-origin authentication and data integrity. Entity authentication. Key distribution, management, recovery, and exhaustion. Authentication protocols. Security services (confidentiality, authentication, integrity, access control, non-repudiation, and availability) and mechanisms (encryption, data-integrity mechanisms, digital signatures, keyed hashes, access-control mechanisms, challenge-response authentication, traffic padding, and routing control). Projects will be offered in selected topics in cryptography."
COMP 7531 "Database Systems Principles" "Prerequisite: COMP 6521.  Database models. Algebraic, logical, and deductive database languages. Query equivalence and optimization. Query rewriting, information integration and data exchange. Incomplete information and complex values. Introduction to current research topics. A project is required."
COMP 7651 "Advanced Analysis of Algorithms" "Prerequisite: COMP 6651.  Amortized analysis of algorithms, NP-hardness and approximation algorithms, online algorithms, randomized algorithms. Selected topics of current interest. Project or term paper."
COMP 7661 "Advanced Rendering and Animation" "Prerequisite: COMP 6761.  Advanced concepts in rendering and animation with emphasis on computational techniques for synthesizing complex realistic images, both static and dynamic. Topics include: overview of computer graphics techniques in games, cinema, and engineering; realistic rendering methods in real time; animation techniques including physics-based animation. A project is required."
COMP 7751 "Advanced Pattern Recognition " "Prerequisite: COMP 6731.  Pattern recognition principles; modern methods in digitization and data acquisition; advanced topics in feature extraction and selection; principal component analysis and clustering techniques; multiple classifiers and expert systems; advanced topics in neural networks in pattern recognition, performance evaluation and error reduction. Applications. A project is required."
COMP 7781 "Advanced Image Processing" "Prerequisite: COMP 6771 or permission of instructor.  Digital image processing; segmentation morphological processing; wavelet transforms and multi-resolution analysis; partial differential equation approach; variational methods; diffusion and shock filters; Markov random field and Bayesian inference; energy minimization framework: snakes, active contours, Mumford-Shah model, level set method; numerical implementation; applications; image inpainting; registration; and document processing. A project is required."
COMP 791 "Topics in Computer Science II" "Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COMP 791A, COMP 791B, etc."
COMP 7941 "Masters Research and Thesis" "Students are required to submit a thesis prepared under the guidance of a faculty member appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee. The thesis must represent the result of the students independent work undertaken after admission to the program. The thesis will be evaluated by a committee appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee."
COMP 8901 "Doctoral Research and Thesis" "SOEN 6011 Software Engineering Processes (4 credits)"
SOEN 6021 "Software Re-engineering" "Prerequisite: SOEN 6461 or permission of the instructor.This course introduces software re-engineering, software architecture recovery andreconstruction, and reflexion models. Students use development history to support reengineering,and are exposed to the latest empirical studies on software reengineeringand software metrics applied to software re-engineering. Also, studentslearn how to apply various software re-engineering patterns and software migrationstrategies. A project is required.  Note: Students who have received credit for SOEN 691 (Software Re-engineering)may not take this course for credit."
SOEN 6211 "Semantic Computing" "System analysis, architecture, and engineering for semantic softwareproducts. Text Mining systems and their architectures. Tagging and Tag Analysis. Recommender Systems and Collaborative Filtering. Crawling the Blogosphere and Opinion Mining. Applying Clustering, Machine Learning, Classification, and Regression. The Web of Data and Semantic Web Technologies: RDF, RDFS, SPARQL. Linked Open Data (LOD). Design and Re-Use of Semantic Web Vocabularies and Ontologies. Semantic Desktops and Semantic Web Information Systems. Semantic Application Development. Application case studies in biomedical research, software development, business intelligence,online gaming, e-commerce and e-science. Research paper seminar. Empirical evaluation methodologies for semantic systems. A project is required."
SOEN 6311 "Formal Methods" "Components of formal systems: formal methods; levels of formalism. Integrating formal methods into the existing software life-cycle process model for a given project. Attributes of a formal specification language. Formal notations based on extended finite-state machines; case studies involving the design of user interfaces, reactive systems, and concurrent systems. Software development using formal methods, including tools for: type checking; debugging; verifying checkable properties; validation of refinements; and code generation from refinements. A project is required."
SOEN 6431 "Software Comprehension and Maintenance" "The course addresses both technical and managerial views of software comprehension and software maintenance issues. Topics covered in this course include: cognitive models, software visualization, CASE tools, reverse engineering, static and dynamic source code analysis, software configuration management, and introduction to current research topics in software maintenance and program comprehension. A project is required."
SOEN 6441 "Advanced Programming Practices" "Problems of writing and managing code. Managing code complexity and quality through a programming process.Self-documenting code, and documentation generation.Software configuration management.Best practices for writing unit tests to control code quality. Advanced practices such as multi-threading concurrency, code reuse,andfault tolerance. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week."
SOEN 6461 "Software Design Methodologies" "Introduction to software design processes and their models. Representations of design/architecture. Software architectures and design plans. Design methods, object-oriented application frameworks, design patterns, design quality and assurance, coupling and cohesion measurements, design verification and documentation. A design project."
SOEN 6471 "Advanced Software Architectures" "Study of architectural view models, architectural styles and frameworks;Architectural casestudies and extraction of concrete architecture;Architectural design patterns; Model Driven Architecture (MDA), Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). Domain specific architectures such as mobile andcloud computing. A project is required."
SOEN 6481 "Software Systems Requirements Specification" "The requirements engineering (RE) process. Requirements engineering in different software lifecycle models. Problem analysis. Requirements elicitation. Requirements evaluation. Inconsistency management. Risk analysis. Requirements prioritization and negotiation. Requirements specification: natural language documentation, IEEE and ISO standards. Use cases. Agile processes and user stories. Introduction to formal specification: logics, formal languages. Requirements quality assurance. RE tools. Requirements evolution. Traceability. Domain modelling: UML, ontologies, domain-specific languages. Modelling behaviour. Acceptance criteria. Test cases. Cost models. A project is required."
SOEN 6491 "Software Refactoring" "Prerequisite: SOEN 6461."
SOEN 6501 "Programming Competency Test" "See Requirements for the Master of/Magisteriate in Applied Computer Science (MApCompSc) or Master of/Magisteriate in Engineering (Software Engineering) sections."
SOEN 6611 "Software Measurement" "Role of measurement in Software Engineering, theoretical, technical and managerial views on software measurement. Representational theory of measurement. Theoretical validation of software measurement.Goal-driven measurement. Collecting and analyzing software engineering data. Software qualitymodellingand measuring. Testing and measurement. Reliability models. Functional size measurement methods. Effort estimation models and their usage in project management. Software measurement standards. Tool support.Case studies.A project is required."
SOEN 6751 "Human Computer Interface Design " "Introduction to human computer interaction. User-centered design process. Usermodelling. Task analysis. User interface design knowledge (principles, guidelines and patterns).User interface prototyping. User interface evaluation. A project is required.Laboratory: two hours per week."
SOEN 6761 "Multimedia Computing" "This course covers the state-of-the-art technology for multimedia computing. The course topics will cover current media types, images, video, audio, graphics and 3D models in terms of algorithms and data structures for their capture, representation, creation, storage, archival, transmission, assembling, presentation and retrieval. This course will cover fundamental ideas in multimedia technology applicable to computer science and software engineering. A project is required."
SOEN 6841 "Software Project Management" "Fundamental concepts of management activities, demonstrating how it can relate to software engineering and how the two can be mutually supportive throughout software development and maintenance. Overview of object-oriented development; software development processes; quality considerations; activity planning; risk management; monitoring and control; maintenance and evolution; issues of professional ethics and practice, and legal issues. A project is required."
SOEN 6861 "Services Computing: Foundations, Design and Implementations" "System design with Service Oriented Architecture. Open standards for Web services. Development of SOAP (Service-Oriented Architecture and Programming) and RESTful (REpresentational State Transfer) services. Business process modelling and management. Service composition. Formal models for services. A project is required."
SOEN 691 "Topics in Software Engineering " "Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. SOEN 691A, SOEN 691B, etc."
SOEN 6951 "Software Engineering Case Study" "Students will complete a case study of a software project. Whenever possible, the project should be conducted in an industrial environment with the cooperation of the students employer."
SOEN 6971 "Project and Report" "Prerequisite: Completion of 16 credits; a CGPA of 3.40 or greater; permission of the Department.  See Requirements for the Degree of Master of/Magisteriate in Applied Computer Science (MApCompSc) section. Project: 8 hours per week."
SOEN 7481 "Software Verification and Testing" "Prerequisites: SOEN 6461, SOEN 6481."
SOEN 7761 "Intelligent User Interfaces" "Prerequisite: SOEN 6751.  Intelligent systems and intelligent interfaces. A brief introduction to knowledge representation and reasoning. Creation and adaptation of user models. Software agents at the user interface. Applications of these concepts in the development of intelligent user interfaces. Adaptive user interfaces. Selected advanced topics, such as natural language interfaces, speech based user interfaces, and mobile user interfaces. Laboratory: two hours per week. A project is required."
SOEN 791 "Topics in Software Engineering II" "Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. SOEN 791A, SOEN 791B, etc."
SOEN 7941 "Masters Research and Thesis" "Students are required to submit a thesis prepared under the guidance of a faculty member appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee. The thesis must represent the result of the students independent work undertaken after admission to the program. The thesis will be evaluated by a committee appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee."
SOEN 8901 "Doctoral Research and Thesis" ""
ACCO 220 "Financial and Managerial Accounting" "This course provides an introduction to accounting principles underlying the preparation of financial reports with an emphasis on the relationship between accounting information and production decisions. It examines the relationship between costs, production volume, and profit, as well as the practical benefits of standard costs for planning and control purposes. The role of accounting information in various manufacturing decisions is also highlighted."
ACCO 230 "Introduction to Financial Accounting" "This course provides an introduction to accounting concepts underlying financial statements of organizations. It focuses on the analysis, measurement, and reporting of business transactions to users of financial statements. It also examines the uses and limitations of accounting information for investment and credit decisions."
ACCO 240 "Introduction to Managerial Accounting" "Prerequisite: ACCO 230. This course examines the role of accounting information for decision making, and focuses on concepts and techniques used in planning operations, controlling activities, and evaluating managerial performance. New developments are addressed with a focus on contemporary business issues and real-world applicability of management accounting concepts and techniques."
ACCO 310 "Financial Reporting I" "Prerequisite: COMM 305 previously or concurrently. Intensive study is made of the theory and practice of external financial reporting by business organizations, focusing on concepts and procedures underlying the measurement of assets and the determination of income."
ACCO 320 "Financial Reporting II" "Prerequisite: ACCO 310. This course continues the intensive study of ACCO 310, with particular emphasis on accounting for liabilities, shareholders equity, and other related topics such as earnings per share, pension accounting, and accounting for income taxes."
ACCO 330 "Cost and Management Accounting" "Prerequisite: COMM 305. This course provides an examination of the techniques, systems, and procedures applicable to the managerial use of accounting information for planning, decision-making, and control. Topics include cost accumulation and allocation, product and process costing, flexible budgeting and variance analysis, evaluation of managerial performance, and transfer pricing."
ACCO 340 "Income Taxation in Canada" "Prerequisite: COMM 217. This course provides core knowledge regarding the federal income tax structure and the Canadian goods and services tax system. It examines the taxation of employment, business, property income, capital gains and other sources of income for an individual."
ACCO 350 "Accounting and Information Technology" "Prerequisite: COMM 226 or 301, 305. This course examines the role of computerized accounting information systems (AIS) in organizations. Students learn how to justify, design, and utilize AIS to provide pertinent information to managers for decision making. The course helps to identify appropriate usage of information technology in specific accounting contexts. Topics include e-business, computer fraud, information systems security and controls, systems analysis, and management of information technology."
ACCO 355 "Analysis of Financial Statements" "Prerequisite: COMM 305, 308. This course explores the usefulness and limitations of financial statements for investment and credit decisions. It focuses on the interpretation of the information contained in financial statements which reflect the economic characteristics of the firm and its strategic business decisions. Instruments and techniques for financial statement analysis are discussed and applied to case studies and actual companies."
ACCO 360 "Principles of Auditing" "Prerequisite: COMM 305. This course examines the concepts and methods of auditing and how internal and external audits are integrated in a more general corporate governance and risk management framework. The importance of the design and monitoring of effective internal controls is highlighted. The objectives, concepts and methods of auditing are illustrated with examples and short cases. They are also applied to solve simple problems and cases."
ACCO 365 "U.S. Federal Taxation" "Prerequisite: COMM 217 or ACCO 230. This course familiarizes the student with individual and corporate taxation in the U.S. The use of professional judgment in the application of tax planning recommendations is also addressed in this course."
ACCO 400 "Accounting Theory" "Prerequisite: ACCO 320. This course examines the theoretical foundations of the contemporary approach to financial reporting, and the political and pragmatic considerations in the development of the conceptual framework underlying current accounting standards. Alternative theories of accounting are discussed and controversial areas are emphasized."
ACCO 420 "Financial Reporting III " "Prerequisite: ACCO 320. This course examines the theory and practice of accounting for intercorporate investments, business combinations, consolidation of financial statements, and foreign currency transactions and operations."
ACCO 425 "Financial Reporting IV " "Prerequisite: ACCO 320. This course addresses special topics in accounting including financial reporting for not-for-profit organizations and government entities. Governance, social responsibility concepts, and accountability frameworks are illustrated by comparing the practices of selected organizations with authoritative standards."
ACCO 430 "Advanced Management Accounting" "Prerequisite: ACCO 330. The course examines the integrative and interdisciplinary role of management accounting and its contribution to the complex management process. The course focuses on cases that deal with strategic issues in management accounting and managements need for both quantitative and qualitative information for planning, control, performance evaluation and decision making."
ACCO 435 "Strategic Accounting Case Analysis" "Prerequisite: ACCO 320, 330; COMM 401 previously or concurrently. This course integrates topics in financial and management accounting, finance, and business strategy covered in previous courses. Students are involved in a case environment that requires them to analyze the external and internal environments of a business, perform financial analysis, evaluate alternatives, and recommend a plan of action. Students are introduced to enterprise resource planning (ERP) platforms used in companies, asset financing, and aspects of commercial lending to assess financing alternatives."
ACCO 440 "Advanced Taxation" "Prerequisite: ACCO 340. This course provides core knowledge regarding the federal taxation of corporations, partnerships, and trusts. It introduces analytical skills needed to make decisions regarding various business transfers, combinations, incorporation and estate planning issues for corporations and shareholders."
ACCO 455 "Fraud Prevention and Investigation " "Prerequisite: COMM 217, 315. This course examines the principles of and methodology used in fraud detection and deterrence. Topics covered may include skimming, cash larceny, cheque tampering, billing, payroll and expense reimbursement schemes, non-cash misappropriations, corruption, fraudulent financial statements, conducting investigations and interviewing witnesses. This course may also examine auditors legal responsibilities towards fraud, the evaluation of internal controls and important pieces of legislation such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the Criminal Code. Finally, the ethical aspects associated with fraud are discussed. Class sessions consist of lectures, real-life fraud case discussions and the presentation of DVDs from the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners."
ACCO 465 "Advanced Assurance Services " "Prerequisite: ACCO 320, 360; or ACCO 450. This course covers important topics and concepts in auditing and assurance services. It builds on audit principles covered in previous courses and introduces specialized and advanced topics that are of particular importance to professional accountants. In covering topics and their application, the course focuses on decision-making processes followed by auditors."
ACCO 470 "Special Topics in Accounting" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. This course is intended to complement accounting courses taken previously or concurrently at the senior level. It provides an opportunity for more intensive study in one or more specific topics in accounting."
ACCO 495 "Honours Seminar in Accountancy " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the honours program; ACCO 400 previously or concurrently. This seminar is offered to students in the Honours in Accountancy program over the course of two terms. In the first term, the seminar surveys accounting history, research methodology and recent research in topics covered in the Accountancy curriculum. In addition, students begin working on a research or case project to be conducted under the supervision of a faculty member. In the second term, students complete their project for submission by the end of the term. Presentation of the project at a poster session or department seminar is also required."
ACTT 201 "" "This course emphasizes the development of imagination and physical expression, including the basics of improvisation, the playing of intention, and the group ensemble experience working towards presentation."
ACTT 202 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 201 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course builds on skills previously acquired in the area of playing intention and group ensemble, emphasizing the development of skills pertaining to language, character, and text."
ACTT 209 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a specialization in the Department of Theatre or written permission of the Department. This studio course is designed to bring together students from all of the Departments specializations to explore basic skills and principles of performance creation and acting for the theatre. The course combines theoretical readings and practical explorations relating to diverse perspectives on an artists role in society."
ACTT 210 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course places increased emphasis on movement, voice, and text interpretation, working in a realistic style of physical actions such as Stanislavskis work on embodiment. The course offers foundational principles for creating a role, with focus on contemporary and early modern realistic dramatic texts."
ACTT 211 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Acting for the Theatre or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course cultivates the expressive potential of the actors instrument: the body, voice, and imagination. It aims to hone the basic tools of physical and of vocal expression. Students practise applying these tools in tudes, poetry performances, and scenes."
ACTT 231 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Acting for the Theatre or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio class covers the elements of preparation for theatrical presentation with emphasis on the co-operative nature of theatre. Studio work includes ongoing movement and voice training, and instruction in sensory awareness, spatial relationships, improvisational techniques, and performer-audience relationships."
ACTT 298 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides opportunities for studies in selected styles or modes of theatre performance."
ACTT 299 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides opportunities for studies in selected styles or modes of theatre performance."
ACTT 321 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 211 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course is an introduction to various movement-based performance techniques, methods, or approaches, such as Decroux, Laban, LeCoq, Biomechanics, or somatic work."
ACTT 325 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 211 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Building on the voice and speech skills previously introduced, this course emphasizes embodiment, self-awareness, and freedom of breath; authentic, healthy, and expressive vocal use; and clarity and conviction in speaking text."
ACTT 331 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. In this studio course, students examine, develop, and refine their individual processes for analyzing, exploring, rehearsing, and performing scenes from dramatic texts, with focus on non-realistic genres of text, such as existentialism, absurdism or expressionism."
ACTT 332 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 321 and 325; or written permission of the Department of Theatre. A thorough introduction to improvisation as a method of creation for the stage, using skills such as mask, commedia dellarte, or the techniques of Keith Johnstone.."
ACTT 355 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 325 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course provides a thorough introduction to a particular voice-based performance technique, method, or approach, such as choral singing for the theatre or slam poetry."
ACTT 358 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 321 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Building on previously acquired skills, this course provides an intensive introduction to a particular movement-based performance technique, method, or approach, such as the Viewpoints or the techniques of Eugenio Barba, as intended for acting specialists.."
ACTT 360 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 231 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course focuses on skill development and performance of a particular theatrical genre, such as Elizabethan verse, red-nose clown, or Brechtian epic theatre."
ACTT 370 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 321 and 325; or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Building on previously acquired skills in movement and voice, this course focuses on the development of clown characters and situations, with focus on Michel Dallaires Jeu Clownesque approach to clown training and performance."
ACTT 372 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 321 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Building on previously acquired movement skills, this course focuses on the development of unarmed and armed stage combat skills for the actor."
ACTT 398 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides opportunities for studies in selected styles or modes of theatre performance."
ACTT 399 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides opportunities for studies in selected styles or modes of theatre performance."
ACTT 432 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 321 and 325; or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Building on the skills developed in voice and movement classes, this studio course provides an intensive introduction to the performance of emotion, based on the Rasaboxes training as developed by Richard Schechner."
ACTT 433 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This public performance course offers supervised application of theatrical skills in the collaborative creation of a theatre production."
ACTT 434 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Threatre. This public performance course offers supervised application of theatrical skills in the collaborative creation of a theatre production."
ACTT 435 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This public performance course offers supervised application of theatrical skills in the collaborative creation of a theatre production."
ACTT 436 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This public performance course offers supervised application of theatrical skills in the collaborative realization of a threatre production of a one-act text from the worldwide body of dramatic literature."
ACTT 437 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This public performance course offers supervised application of theatrical skills in the collaborative realization of a theatre production of a one-act text from the worldwide body of dramatic literature."
ACTT 438 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This public performance course offers supervised application of theatrical skills in the collaborative realization of a theatre production of a one-act text from the worldwide body of dramatic literature."
ACTT 440 "" "Prerequisite: FFAR 250; 18 credits in a specialization of the Department of Theatre; and written permission of the Department. This studio course provides students with the opportunity to work in self-selected teams to develop short projects in response to a given theme for performance in a festival format. The course involves working with limited resources with an emphasis on exploration of acting processes. This course has a public performance outcome."
ACTT 450 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 321, 325. Building on the skills developed in movement and voice for the stage, this studio course provides advanced students with the opportunity to apply their skills to text study and character development in an intensive environment without the pressure of creating a public performance. The course may introduce a variety of acting styles to promote further skill development.."
ACTT 455 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 355 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Building on previously acquired skills, this course provides an advanced exploration of a particular voice-based performance technique, method, or approach, such as singing, voice-over or dialects.."
ACTT 458 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 358 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Building on previously acquired skills, this course provides an advanced exploration of a particular movement-based performance technique, method, or approach, such as Decroux, Laban, Lecoq, biomechanics, or somatic work."
ACTT 460 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This public performance course offers supervised application of theatrical skills in the collaborative realization of a theatre production of an iconic text from the worldwide body of dramatic literature, written by a widely recognized playwright, such as Shakespeare, Klidsa, Ibsen, Chekhov, or Zeami."
ACTT 461 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This public performance course offers supervised application of theatrical skills in the collaborative realization of a theatre production of an iconic text from the worldwide body of dramatic literature, written by a widely recognized playwright, such as Shakespeare, Klidsa, Ibsen, Chekhov, or Zeami."
ACTT 462 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. This public performance course offers supervised application of theatrical skills in the collaborative realization of a theatre production of an iconic text from the worldwide body of dramatic literature, written by a widely recognized playwright, such as Shakespeare, Klidsa, Ibsen, Chekhov, or Zeami."
ACTT 465 "" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Specialization in Acting for the Theatre; and written permission of the Department of Theatre. Admission is by audition or application. This studio course involves the supervised creation and performance of a solo or ensemble theatre piece, the development of audition technique, and other career-oriented skills. The emphasis is on crystallizing each students unique theatrical identity, while solidifying collaborative skills. This course has a public performance outcome.."
ACTT 480 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course provides students with the opportunity to design a course framework under the guidance of the instructor that includes curriculum, implementation, and assessment for students. Students develop a philosophy of teaching and learning through sustained reflection of their own creative process and selected readings."
ACTT 481 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 480 and written permission of the Department of Theatre. This advanced studio course builds on the skills acquired in ACTT 480 to focus on the development of skills required in conducting an acting workshop: active observation, instructional strategies to deliver the curriculum, and assessment."
ACTT 498 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides opportunities for studies in selected styles or modes of theatre performance."
ACTT 499 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides opportunities for studies in selected styles or modes of theatre performance."
DFTT 209 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a specialization of the Department of Theatre or written permission of the Department. An examination of the theatrical design process, including the role of designers. Students study the conception, communication, and realization of design ideas in lectures and labs.."
DFTT 210 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. An advanced examination of the theatrical design process, including the role of designers. Students study the conception, communication, and realization of design ideas in lectures and labs. This course develops the students skills in developing and communicating theatrical designs.."
DFTT 211 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Design for the Theatre or written permission of the Department. Students study drawing and drafting techniques for the stage with emphasis on observation and rendering. They examine specific drawing methods to efficiently communicate design ideas. Focus is on basic drawing and drafting techniques using traditional and modern media."
DFTT 298 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. The study of specialized aspects of theatre design."
DFTT 299 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. The study of specialized aspects of theatre design."
DFTT 301 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students apply their design knowledge to special projects, which may include portfolio development or the design of Department of Theatre productions."
DFTT 305 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides students with the opportunity to design and implement an independent project supervised by a full-time faculty member.."
DFTT 311 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 and 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study lighting design for the theatre with emphasis on imaginative and analytical processes of developing and communicating lighting design ideas. Students participate in lectures, studios, and projects, and examine theories, aesthetics, and conventions of lighting design.."
DFTT 315 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 and 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study lighting for the stage with emphasis on analysis, development, and execution of design ideas. Students participate in lectures and studios, and examine lighting as a practical, expressive, and interpretive form. Focus is on basic realization methods, for example hanging and focusing lighting equipment. Students have scheduled access to a theatre space."
DFTT 321 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 and 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study costume design for the theatre with emphasis on imaginative and analytical processes of developing and communicating costume design ideas. Students participate in lectures, studios, and projects, and examine theories, aesthetics, and conventions of costume design.."
DFTT 325 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 and 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study costuming for the stage with emphasis on analysis, development, and execution of design ideas. Students participate in lectures and studios and examine costuming as a practical, expressive, and interpretive form. The focus is on basic realization methods, for example, patterning and draping. Students have scheduled access to a costume shop and dyeing facilities.."
DFTT 326 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 and 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study costume accessory design for the stage with emphasis on analysis, development, and execution of design ideas. Students participate in lectures and studios and examine costume accessory design as a practical, expressive and interpretive form. The focus is on basic realization methods, for example, mask-making, millinery, and accessory construction. Students have scheduled access to a costume shop and dyeing facilities.."
DFTT 331 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 and 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study set design for the theatre with emphasis on imaginative and analytical processes of developing and communicating set design ideas. Students participate in lectures, studios, and projects to examine theories, aesthetics, and conventions of set design.."
DFTT 335 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 and 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study stage scenery with emphasis on analysis, development, and execution of design ideas. Students participate in lectures and studios to examine scenery as a practical, expressive, and interpretive form. Focus is on basic realization methods, for example, drafting and construction. Students have scheduled access to a scene shop.."
DFTT 336 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 and 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study stage properties with an emphasis on analysis, development, and execution of design ideas. They participate in lectures and studios, and examine stage properties as a practical, expressive, and interpretive form. The focus is on basic realization methods, for example, casting, assembling, and use of materials and equipment. Students have scheduled access to a property shop.."
DFTT 337 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 and 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course includes the study of the materials and technology of scene painting.."
DFTT 341 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 and 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study design with a variety of media, with an emphasis on imaginative and analytical processes. They participate in lectures and studios, and examine the theories, aesthetics, and conventions of multimedia design.."
DFTT 345 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 209 and 210 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study elements of analog and digital media with an emphasis on the execution of design ideas. They participate in lectures and studios, and examine elements of multimedia as practical, expressive, and interpretive forms. The focus is on basic realization methods, for example, the installation of projection and sound equipment. Students have scheduled access to a theatre space.."
DFTT 350 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209; two of ACTT 210, DFTT 210, PERC 210; DFTT 209; FFAR 250; PERC 211, 212; and written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students learn to collaborate with directors, other designers, and technical staff to creatively realize set, costume, lighting, properties, video, and sound designs for live performance."
DFTT 351 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209; two of ACTT 210, DFTT 210, PERC 210; DFTT 209; FFAR 250; PERC 211, 212; and written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students learn to collaborate with directors, other designers, and technical staff to creatively realize set, costume, lighting, properties, video, and sound designs for live performance."
DFTT 370 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209; two of ACTT 210, DFTT 210, PERC 210; DFTT 209; FFAR 250; PERC 211, 212; and written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study theories and practices of stage management, production management and technical direction. They develop technical skills in scenery, properties, and costumes, as well as lighting and sound. By completing specific assignments related to department public performances, students are introduced to the language, tools, and techniques used in rehearsal halls, shops, and backstage."
DFTT 371 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209; two of ACTT 210, DFTT 210, PERC 210; DFTT 209; FFAR 250; PERC 211, 212; and written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study theories and practices of stage management, production management, and technical direction. They develop technical skills in scenery, properties, and costumes, as well as lighting and sound. By completing specific assignments related to department public performances, students are introduced to the language, tools, and techniques used in rehearsal halls, shops, and backstage."
DFTT 398 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. The study of specialized aspects of theatre design realization."
DFTT 399 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. The study of specialized aspects of theatre design."
DFTT 401 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 301 and written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students apply their design knowledge to special projects, which may include portfolio development or the design of Department of Theatre productions."
DFTT 405 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 305 and written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides students with the opportunity to design and implement an independent project, supervised by a full-time faculty member.."
DFTT 408 "" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in degree program and written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for work completed for a recognized theatre company, or a project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time Theatre faculty member."
DFTT 409 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 408 and written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for work completed for a recognized theatre company, or a project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time Theatre faculty member."
DFTT 450 "Advanced Public Performance Design " "Prerequisite: DFTT 350 or 351 and written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students learn to collaborate with directors, other designers, and technical staff at an advanced level to creatively realize set, costume, lighting, properties, video, and sound designs for live performance."
DFTT 451 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 350 or 351 and written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students learn to collaborate with directors, other designers, and technical staff at an advanced level to creatively realize set, costume, lighting, properties, video, and sound designs for live performance."
DFTT 470 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 370 or 371 and written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study advanced theories and practices of stage management, production management, and technical direction. They develop technical skills in scenery, properties, and costumes, as well as in lighting and sound. By completing specific assignments related to department public performances, students are introduced to the language, tools, and techniques in rehearsal halls, shops, and backstage."
DFTT 471 "" "Prerequisite: DFTT 370 or 371 and written permission of the Department of Theatre. Students study advanced theories and practices of stage management, production management, and technical direction. They develop technical skills in scenery, properties, and costumes, as well as in lighting and sound. By completing specific assignments related to department public performances, students are introduced to the language, tools, and techniques in rehearsal halls, shops, and backstage."
DFTT 498 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. The study of specialized aspects of theatre design conception."
DFTT 499 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. The study of specialized aspects of theatre design."
PERC 201 "" "This course explores individual and collective storytelling within a framework of the worlds oral narrative traditions. Students study and practise techniques for telling stories, whether drawn from their individual experiences, from the experiences of others, or from oral tales recorded in written form. Students are encouraged to explore and develop their own storytelling style."
PERC 209 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a specialization of the Department of Theatre or written permission of the Department. This studio course is designed to bring together students from all of the Departments specializations to explore basic skills and principles of performance creation and acting for the theatre. The course combines theoretical readings and practical explorations relating to diverse perspectives on an artists role in society."
PERC 210 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course introduces students to theories and practical skills from a wide range of approaches including agitprop, group workshop, collective creation, documentary drama, issue-based theatre, and collaborative community plays. Theory and practice are examined in the context of the relationship of the performance to its audience."
PERC 211 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a program of the Department of Theatre or written permission of the Department. This lecture course offers an introduction to the history of urban performance space and the variety of theatre buildings and production philosophies in Montreal. Students encounter the challenges of a small production project in collaboration with other students across the Departments specialization programs, mirroring the close co-operation between directors, actors, designers, and artisans working in the profession."
PERC 212 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a program of the Department of Theatre or written permission of the Department. This lecture course offers an introduction to the multi-faceted role of dramaturgy in contemporary theatre practice including production dramaturgy and new play development. This foundational course covers approaches to script analysis from Aristotle to Brecht and beyond, including elements such as structure, semiotics, and style."
PERC 298 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. The study of specialized aspects of performance creation."
PERC 303 "" "Prerequisite: 24 credits. This lecture course provides a framework for the analysis of theory, history, and practice up until the 19th century. Students are encouraged to critically approach different models of writing and reading in theatre history. The course examines both literary and non-literary genres of theatre and performance, as well as the theatres ritual functions in various times and cultures."
PERC 306 "" "Prerequisite: 24 credits. This lecture course engages with theatre practices and history as art forms and social phenomena from the 19th century to contemporary times. Students are exposed to key theatre historical and theoretical texts within the context of contemporary critical theory. The course problematizes the notion of the canon as it has been challenged by the rise of feminism, post-colonial studies, and queer theory, among other lenses."
PERC 311 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course introduces students to basic organizational, analytical, and aesthetic concepts of directing for the stage. Course content focuses primarily on applied script analysis in naturalism and realism through a study of key figures in directing from the 20th century. The final assignment consists of the preparation and direction of a short scene with student actors. This course has a public performance outcome."
PERC 312 "" "Prerequisite: PERC 212. This seminar course examines three major fields of dramaturgy relating to production, performance creation, and new play development. Students study the work of current dramaturges, explore the skills and concerns associated with each field, and apply knowledge and skills gained in a practical component.."
PERC 318 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course focuses on the creation of original performance texts to be developed through a workshop process. The class may work from a common theme or form, for example, writing a play for two actors, or adaptations from another genre."
PERC 321 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a program of the Department of Theatre or written permission of the Department. This seminar course introduces key texts in the interdisciplinary field of performance studies, and investigates a broad range of sites and practices from the realms of theatre, dance, and other cultural forms, from avant-garde to popular, aesthetic to political.."
PERC 322 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a program of the Department of Theatre or written permission of the Department. This seminar course provides a grounding in feminist and queer theory as critical tools for the analysis and creation of performance. The performance of gendered and queer identities is considered, as presented in everyday life and on stage.."
PERC 323 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a program of the Department of Theatre or written permission of the Department. This seminar course in post-colonial theory provides students with flexible methodologies for examining the impact of colonialism on societies and cultures through the study of dramatic and other forms of literature and expression. The course covers key concepts such as hegemony, exoticism, identity, alterity, hybridity, and resistance, as these terms circulate within Canada and internationally.."
PERC 324 "" "This lecture course analyzes historical and contemporary examples of lesbian/gay/bisexual/transgender/two-spirited and queer theatre and performance. The course examines how the stage has been, and continues to be, a necessary public forum for queer political activism and identity politics, and offers a comprehensive overview of key concerns in sexuality studies in Canada and internationally.."
PERC 351 "" "Prerequisite: PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course introduces the art of engagement in theatre and performance creation practices. Students gain skills and knowledge in areas such as arts-based research, interview techniques, alliances, partnerships, participatory evaluation methods, and analysis of aesthetic and ethical concerns. The course includes practical explorations of various approaches to creating socially engaged theatre and performance."
PERC 353 "" "Prerequisite: PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course focuses on the practice and ethical implications of oral narrative traditions and their roles in contemporary society. Working with personal, traditional, and culturally specific stories, students create, craft, and perform new stories or oral histories."
PERC 354 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course examines the principles on which popular and other applied theatre forms are based, including objectives and approaches of theatre companies around the world engaged in social activism and the creation of opportunities for social change. This course provides an overview of founders, practitioners, and theorists including Theatre of the Oppressed and theatre and development practices originating in Africa and India. Topics are approached through practical learning in specific techniques, and application of critical lenses for analysis and assessment. Students may also prepare a work of popular theatre."
PERC 356 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course introduces students to basic theories, practices, and history of performance with puppets and performing objects. It combines building, basic manipulation, and show-making techniques. Students work on short scenes for performance."
PERC 362 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This advanced studio course focuses on the creation of original performance texts to be developed through a workshop process. The class may work from a common theme or form, for example, writing a play for two actors or adaptations from another genre."
PERC 364 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course explores key ethical, dramaturgical, and performative dimensions of the emergent field of oral history performance within the context of a range of forms that might include verbatim and documentary forms, applied theatre, playback theatre, community engaged performance, storytelling, performance art and digital media. This class has a public performance."
PERC 384 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course focuses on collaborative approaches to theatre and performance creation. Students generate original material and create intermedial performance works. This course has a performance outcome before a small audience."
PERC 386 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course emphasizes creative inquiry as the basis for interdisciplinary approaches to performance creation. In-class practical exercises open up possibilities for creation of original work through experimentation in creative process. Students also build skills in entrepreneurship as primary creators."
PERC 388 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course provides students with the opportunity to work in self-selected teams to develop short projects for performance in a festival format. The course involves working with limited resources and emphasizes creative problem solving with the materials on hand. This course has a public performance outcome."
PERC 390 "" "Prerequisite: FFAR 250; 18 credits in a specialization of the Department of Theatre or written permission of the Department. This course involves students working in ensemble on all aspects of the study and production of an existing theatre script, or the creation and production of an original piece of theatre engaging with a particular event, issue, or topic. This course has a public performance outcome. This course normally takes place over one term."
PERC 398 "" "A seminar course exploring a topic in performance creation."
PERC 399 "" "A seminar or studio course exploring a topic in performance creation."
PERC 405 "" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Theatre. A student-proposed seminar, workshop, or public performance capstone project supervised by a full-time faculty member."
PERC 408 "" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in a specialization of the Department of Theatre; and written permission of the Department. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for work completed for a recognized theatre company, or for a project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time Theatre faculty member."
PERC 409 "" "Prerequisite: PERC 408 and written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for work completed for a recognized theatre company, or for a project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time Theatre faculty member."
PERC 415 "" "Prerequisite: PERC 405 and written permission of the Department of Theatre. This course provides students with the opportunity to design and implement an independent project in Performance Creation, supervised by a full-time faculty member."
PERC 421 "" "Prerequisite: 24 credits. This seminar course involves reading, discussing, and writing about selected plays and performance projects within the context of their intentional engagement with social, cultural, and/or political exigencies. Readings examine the theory and practice of approaches and genres selected from community arts, oral history performance, street theatre, performance art, and political theatre."
PERC 471 "" "Prerequisite: PERC 311 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course builds on already developed skills and knowledge while engaging with additional styles of theatre making, such as director-led creation, postmodern performance, documentary, or verbatim theatre. The final assignment involves directing a short work. This course has a public performance outcome."
PERC 481 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department of Theatre. This studio course provides students with opportunities to experiment with both writing and performing original stories. Students examine contemporary performing artists whose works incorporate a wide range of storytelling modalities. This course has a public performance outcome."
PERC 482 "" "Prerequisite: ACTT 209 or PERC 209 or written permission of the Department. This studio course takes a hands-on, place-based approach to exploring the ethical and practical considerations facing artists and others wishing to work in residence with community partners. Students investigate how theatre artists might collaborate with other disciplines to explore social change within specific organizations and/or neighbourhoods. This course has a site-specific public performance outcome."
PERC 490 "" "Prerequisite: FFAR 250; 18 credits in a specialization of the Department of Theatre or written permission of the Department. This course involves students working in ensemble on all aspects of the study and production of an existing theatre script, or the creation and production of an original piece of theatre engaging with a particular event, issue, or topic. This course has a public performance component. This course normally takes place over two terms."
PERC 498 "" "A studio course exploring a topic in performance creation."
PERC 499 "" "A seminar or studio course exploring a topic in performance creation."
ACTU 256 "Mathematics of Finance" "Prerequisite: MATH 264 previously or concurrently; and permission of the Department. Measurement of interest; annuities and perpetuities; amortization and sinking funds; rates of return; bonds and related securities; life insurance."
ACTU 257 "Actuarial Mathematics I" "Prerequisite: ACTU 256. Measurement of mortality; pure endowments; life insurance; net single premiums; life annuities; net annual premiums; special topics."
ACTU 286 "Actuarial Mathematics Lab I" "This lab features problem-solving sessions for the professional examination on financial mathematics of the Society of Actuaries and the Casualty Actuarial Society."
ACTU 357 "Actuarial Mathematics II" "Prerequisite: ACTU 257. Net level premium reserves; multiple life functions; multiple decrements, the expense factor; special topics."
ACTU 386 "Actuarial Mathematics Lab II" "This lab will feature the use of programming languages and software applications."
ACTU 456 "Pension Mathematics" "Prerequisite: ACTU 357. Valuation methods; gains and losses; dynamic control; special topics."
ACTU 457 "Risk Theory" "Prerequisite: ACTU 257. Applications of contingency theory in health insurance, individual and collective risk theory, ruin theory."
ACTU 458 "Credibility Theory" "Prerequisite: ACTU 457; STAT 349 previously or concurrently. Credibility approach to inference for heterogeneous data; classical, regression and Bayesian models; illustrations with insurance data."
ACTU 459 "Loss Distributions" "Prerequisite: ACTU 457; STAT 360. Probability model fitting to loss data; estimation and testing under variety of procedures and sampling designs."
ACTU 486 "Actuarial Mathematics Lab III" "This lab will be a workshop designed to prepare students for the Actuarial Models examination of the Society of Actuaries and the Casualty Actuarial Society."
ACTU 491 "Topics in Actuarial Mathematics" ""
ACTU 492 "Reading Course in Actuarial Mathematics" ""
ACTU 493 "Honours Project in Actuarial Mathematics" ""
MACF 401 "Mathematical and Computational Finance I" "Prerequisite: FINA 385; MATH 265; STAT 349 previously or concurrently. This course is a rigorous introduction to the theory of mathematical and computational finance. Multi-period binomial model; state prices; change of measure; stopping times; European and American derivative securities; interest-rate models; interest-rate derivatives; hedging; convergence to the Black-Scholes model."
MACF 402 "Mathematical and Computational Finance II" "Prerequisite: MACF 401; MATH 473; STAT 461 previously or concurrently. This course is a continuation of MACF 401 and focuses on modelling and computational techniques beyond the binomial model. Simulation; Monte-Carlo methods in finance; option valuation; hedging; heat equation; finite difference techniques; stability and convergence; exotic derivatives; risk management; calibration and parameter estimation."
MACF 491 "Topics in Mathematical and Computational Finance " "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
MACF 492 "Reading Course in Mathematical and Computational Finance " "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
MAST 214 "Calculus and Linear Algebra" "Prerequisite: Cegep Mathematics 105 or 201-NYC, 203 or 201-NYB. Functions; maxima and minima. Velocity and acceleration. Iterative solution of equations, parametric equation of curves. Integrals; change of variables, integration by parts, double integrals, numerical integration. Conic sections. Matrices, determinants, eigen-values, eigenvectors, system of equations. Series and their convergence. Introduction to vector space and complex numbers. Word problems."
MAST 217 "Introduction to Mathematical Thinking" "Prerequisite: MATH 203 and 204, or equivalent. This course aims to foster analytical thinking through a problem-solving approach. Topics include construction of proofs, number systems, ordinality and cardinality, role of examples and counter examples, role of generalizations and specializations; role of symbols, notations and definitions; styles of mathematical discourse."
MAST 218 "Multivariable Calculus I" "Prerequisite: MATH 204 and 205, or equivalent. Vector geometry; lines and planes; curves in R<sup>n</sup>; vector functions; vector differential calculus; extrema and Lagrange multipliers. Introduction to multiple integrals and coordinate transformations. Problem solving with a symbolic computation system, e.g. MAPLE."
MAST 219 "Multivariable Calculus II" "Prerequisite: MAST 218 or equivalent. Vector integral calculus; line and surface integrals; Greens, Stokes and Gauss theorems; coordinate transformations and Jacobians. Power series, applications. Problem solving with a symbolic computation system, e.g. MAPLE."
MAST 221 "Applied Probability" "Prerequisite: MATH 204 and 205, or equivalent; MAST 218 or equivalent previously or concurrently. Counting rules, discrete probability distributions; random sampling; conditional probability; means and variances, normal and other continuous sampling distributions. Applications. Use of statistical software, e.g. MINITAB."
MAST 223 "Introduction to Stochastic Methods of Operations Research" "Prerequisite: MAST 221 or equivalent; MAST 219 or equivalent previously or concurrently. Markov chains; queuing theory; inventory theory; Markov decision processes; applications to reliability."
MAST 232 "Mathematics with Computer Algebra" "Prerequisite: MATH 204 and 205, or equivalent. An introduction to the use of a high-level mathematical programming language (MAPLE or MATHEMATICA) as a practical aid in doing mathematics. Most classes are given in an interactive way in the computer laboratory. The emphasis is on applications, not on general programming techniques or abstract structures. The aim is to arrive at a sufficient working familiarity with the computer algebra language to permit its regular use in subsequent studies and applications. The commands and online resources are introduced through a review of arithmetic, complex numbers, algebra, Euclidean geometry, trigonometry, coordinate systems and graphing, elementary functions and transformations, series, derivatives, integrals, vectors and matrices. There may be additional topics from domains such as number theory, differential equations, integral transforms, probability and statistics."
MAST 234 "Linear Algebra and Applications I" "Prerequisite: MATH 204 or equivalent. System of linear equations, matrix operations, echelon forms and LU-factorization; R<sup>n</sup>: subspaces, linear dependence, basis, dimension, matrix transformations; eigenvalues and eigenvectors in R<sup>n</sup> and applications (e.g. Markov chains, dynamical systems). A symbolic computation system, e.g. MAPLE, is extensively used."
MAST 235 "Linear Algebra and Applications II" "Prerequisite: MAST 234 or equivalent. R<sup>n</sup>: Orthogonality, projections, Gram-Schmidt method and QR-factorization; applications to least square methods (data fitting, inconsistent systems). Symmetric matrices, principal axes theorem and applications. Special topics (e.g. coding theory, differential equations, error analysis). A symbolic computation system, e.g. MAPLE, is extensively used."
MAST 324 "Introduction to Optimization" "Prerequisite: MATH 205 or equivalent. Introduction to the theory of optimization; linear programming; the simplex method; duality and transportation problem. Introduction to graphs and networks; applications. Use of computing softwares."
MAST 330 "Differential Equations" "Prerequisite: MAST 219, 234 or equivalent. First order differential equations; second order differential equations; Laplace transform methods; mathematical models and numerical methods."
MAST 331 "Mathematical Modelling" "Prerequisite: MAST 221, 324 previously or concurrently, 234 or equivalent. Introduction to mathematical modelling; predator-prey models in biology, game theory, decision analysis, stability theory; modelling electric circuits."
MAST 332 "Techniques in Symbolic Computation" "Prerequisite: MAST 217 or COMP 232 or equivalent; COMP 248 or equivalent; MAST 232 or permission of the Department. This course is an application-oriented introduction to symbolic computation, as it applies to algebra, number theory and combinatorics covering the following topics: capabilities of symbolic systems (e.g. MAPLE), modular methods, arithmetic mod p, arithmetic mod m, matrices mod p, Chinese remainder theorem, polynomial factorization mod p. Applications to coding theory and cryptography. Combinatorial algorithms."
MAST 333 "Applied Statistics" "Prerequisite: MAST 221 or equivalent. Graphical and numerical descriptive methods; Estimation and hypothesis testing; linear regression and correlation; one way ANOVA; contingency and goodness of fit tests. Use of statistical software, e.g. MINITAB."
MAST 334 "Numerical Analysis" "Prerequisite: MAST 219 or equivalent; MAST 232 or equivalent; MAST 235 previously or concurrently. Introduction to computing softwares; numerical solution of non-linear equations; interpolations and approximations; quadrature and numerical integration."
MAST 335 "Investment Mathematics" "Prerequisite: MAST 218 or equivalent. Simple and compound interest; annuities; amortization and sinking funds; mortgage schemes; bonds and related securities; capital cost and depletion; spread-sheet implementation."
MAST 397 "Topics in Mathematics and Statistics" ""
MAST 398 "Reading Course in Mathematics and Statistics" ""
MATH 200 "Fundamental Concepts of Algebra" "This course is designed to give students the background necessary for MATH 201. Some previous exposure to algebra is assumed. Sets, algebraic techniques, inequalities, graphs of equations. Lectures and tutorials."
MATH 201 "Elementary Functions" "Sets, inequalities, graphs of functions, and relations. Trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions. Lectures and tutorials."
MATH 202 "College Algebra" "Prerequisite: MATH 201 or equivalent. Progressions, combinations, permutations, binomial theorem, mathematical induction, inequalities, polynomials, cartesian and polar forms of complex numbers, conics. Lectures and tutorials."
MATH 203 "Differential and Integral Calculus I" "Prerequisite: MATH 201 or equivalent. Functional notation. Differentiation of polynomials. The power, product, quotient, and chain rules. Differentiation of elementary functions. Implicit differentiation. Higher derivatives. Maxima and minima. Applications: tangents to plane curves, graphing, related rates. Approximations using the differential. Antiderivatives, definite integrals, area. Lectures and tutorials."
MATH 204 "Vectors and Matrices" "Prerequisite: MATH 201 or equivalent. Algebra and geometry of vectors, dot and cross products, lines and planes. System of equations, operations on matrices, rank, inverse, quadratic form, and rotation of axes. Lectures and tutorials."
MATH 205 "Differential and Integral Calculus II" "Prerequisite: MATH 203 or equivalent. Techniques of integration: substitutions, integration by parts, partial fractions. Improper integrals. Physical applications of the definite integral. Infinite series: tests for convergence. Power series, Taylors theorem. Lectures and tutorials."
MATH 206 "Algebra and Functions" "Coordinate systems. Radicals and distance formula. Polynomials, factoring, and graphing. Relations and functions. Linear and quadratic functions, equations, and systems. Exponents, exponential and logarithmic functions and equations. Lectures and tutorials."
MATH 208 "Fundamental Mathematics I" "Prerequisite: MATH 206 or equivalent. This course is a prerequisite course for John Molson School of Business students*. Matrices, Gaussian elimination, input-output analysis, progressions, compound interest, annuities, permutations and combinations, probability, binomial theorem, exponential and logarithmic functions, inequalities, linear programming. Lectures and tutorials."
MATH 209 "Fundamental Mathematics II" "Prerequisite: MATH 206 or equivalent. This course is a prerequisite course for John Molson School of Business students*. Limits; differentiation of rational, exponential, and logarithmic functions; theory of maxima and minima; integration. Lectures and tutorials."
MATH 212 "" "This course deals with a blend of fascinating mathematical themes in various contexts: historical, cultural, and practical. It is intended for non-mathematics students. One of the aims of the course is to demonstrate the presence of mathematics and mathematical ideas in many aspects of modern life. At a deeper level, it is also intended to explain what mathematics is all about and why some easily stated assertions, such as Fermats last theorem, are so difficult to prove. Students who complete the course successfully should have enough understanding and knowledge of fundamental ideas and techniques of mathematics to appreciate its power, its beauty, and its relevance in so many different fields such as architecture, art, commerce, engineering, music, and all of the sciences."
MATH 215 "Great Ideas in Mathematics" "Mathematics is used to unravel the secrets of nature. This course introduces students to the world of mathematical ideas and mathematical thinking. Without being overly technical, that is, without requiring any formal background from the student other than high school mathematics, the course delves into some of the great ideas of mathematics. The topics discussed range from the geometric results of the Ancient Greeks to the notion of infinity to more modern developments."
MATH 217 "Topics in Mathematics and Statistics" ""
MATH 218 "Reading Course in Mathematics and Statistics" ""
MATH 220 "Mathematical Methods in Chemistry" "Prerequisite: Cegep Mathematics 203 or 201-NYB or MATH 205. Partial derivatives. First-order differential equations (first- and second-order chemical reactions). Hermite, Laguerre, and Legendre equations. Solutions by power series. Eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, Sturm-Liouville theory."
MATH 251 "Linear Algebra I" "Prerequisite: MATH 204 and 205 or equivalent. Matrices and linear equations; vector spaces; bases, dimension and rank; linear mappings and algebra of linear operators; matrix representation of linear operators; determinants; eigenvalues and eigenvectors; diagonalization."
MATH 252 "Linear Algebra II" "Prerequisite: MATH 251 or equivalent. Characteristic and minimum polynomials; invariant subspaces, invariant direct sums; nilpotent operators, Jordan canonical form; cyclic subspaces; rational canonical form; bilinear and quadratic forms; inner product; orthogonality; adjoint operators and orthogonal operators."
MATH 264 "Advanced Calculus I" "Prerequisite: MATH 204 and 205 or equivalent. Introduction to limits and continuity in R<sup>n</sup>. Multivariate calculus: the derivative as a linear approximation; matrix representation of derivatives; tangent spaces; gradients, extrema, including Lagrange multipliers, Taylors formula and the classification of critical points."
MATH 265 "Advanced Calculus II" "Prerequisite: MATH 264 or equivalent. Implicit functions and the implicit function theorem. Multiple integrals and change of variables. Curves, surfaces and vector calculus."
MATH 339 "Combinatorics" "Prerequisite: 18 credits in post-Cegep Mathematics. General principles of counting, permutations, combinations, identities, partitions, generating functions, Fibonacci numbers, Stirling numbers, Catalan numbers, principle of inclusion-exclusion. Graphs, subgraphs, isomorphism, Euler graphs, Hamilton paths and cycles, planar graphs, Kuratowskis Theorem, trees, colouring, 5-colour theorem, matching, Halls theorem."
MATH 352 "Linear Algebra III" "Prerequisite: MATH 252. Matrices, linear transformations, determinants, metric concepts, inner-product spaces, dual spaces, spectral theorem, bilinear and quadratic forms, canonical forms for linear transformation, matrix functions, selected topics."
MATH 354 "Numerical Analysis" "Prerequisite: MATH 265 or equivalent; MATH 252 or equivalent, previously or concurrently. Error analysis in numerical algorithms; solution of non-linear equations; fixed point iterations, rate of convergence. Interpolations and approximations, Legendre polynomials. Numerical integration and quadrature."
MATH 361 "Operations Research" "Prerequisite: MATH 251 or equivalent. Introduction to the theory of optimization; linear programming, simplex method; revised simplex method; transport and assignment problems; integer programming; introduction to graphs and networks."
MATH 364 "Analysis I" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in post-Cegep Mathematics or permission of the Department. Mathematical rigour: proofs and counter-examples; quantifiers; number systems; cardinality, decimal representation, density of the rationals, least upper bound. Sequences and series; review of functions, limits and continuity."
MATH 365 "Analysis II" "Prerequisite: MATH 364 or equivalent. Connectedness and compactness in the reals. Intermediate value theorem; extreme values for continuous functions. Differential and integral calculus; fundamental theorem of calculus; power series."
MATH 366 "Complex Analysis I" "Prerequisite: MATH 265 or equivalent. Algebra and geometry of complex numbers, linear transformations, analytic functions, Laurents series, calculus of residues, special functions."
MATH 369 "Abstract Algebra I" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in post-Cegep Mathematics or permission of the Department. Introduction to the ring of integers and the integers modulo N. Groups: definitions and examples; sub-groups, quotients and homomorphisms (including Lagranges theorem, Cayleys theorem and the isomorphism theorems). Introduction to the Cauchy and Sylow theorems and applications."
MATH 370 "Ordinary Differential Equations" "Prerequisite: MATH 265, 251 or equivalent. Separable equations, exact equations, integrating factors, force fields, first order linear equations, input-output concept, second order equations, Sturm-Liouville problems, applications, series solutions, reduction of order, variation of parameters, nth-order linear equations with constant coefficients, Laplace transforms, block diagrams, and signal-flow graphs."
MATH 387 "Mathematics Lab III" "This lab will demonstrate the use of MAPLE software for Calculus, Linear Algebra, and Statistics."
MATH 392 "Elementary Number Theory" "Prerequisite: 18 credits in post-Cegep Mathematics. Number systems, division and factorization, number-theoretic functions, congruences, algebraic congruences and primitive roots, quadratic residues, diophantine equations."
MATH 397 "History of Mathematics" "Prerequisite: MATH 252 or permission of the Department; MATH 365. Early mathematics, Greek mathematics, European mathematics in the Middle Ages, the origin and development of analytic geometry and calculus, mathematics as free creation, the generality of mathematics in the 20th century."
MATH 433 "Calculus of Variations" "Prerequisite: MATH 265, 365, 370 or equivalent. Nature of problems, weak variations, the first variation, Eulers equation. The second variation, Jacobis equation, Legendres test, conjugate points. Relative maxima and minima, iso-perimetrical problems. Integrals with variable end points. Applications to problems in pure and applied mathematics; the principle of least action. Strong variations, the Weierstrass E-function."
MATH 464 "Real Analysis" "Prerequisite: MATH 265, 365 or equivalent. Metric spaces; function spaces; compactness, completeness, fixed-point theorems, Ascoli-Arzela theorem, Weierstrass approximation theorem."
MATH 466 "Complex Analysis II" "Prerequisite: MATH 265, 365, 366 or equivalent. Cauchys theorem, singularities, maximum modulus principle, uniqueness theorem, normal families, Riemann mapping theorem."
MATH 467 "Measure Theory" "Prerequisite: MATH 265, 365; MATH 464 previously or concurrently, or equivalent. Lebesque measure and integration on the real line, convergence theorems, absolute continuity, completeness of L<sup>2</sup>[0,1]."
MATH 470 "Abstract Algebra II" "Prerequisite: MATH 369 or equivalent. Group action and proof of the Sylow theorems. Introduction to rings, ideals, euclidean domains, principal ideal domains and unique factorization domains; polynomial rings."
MATH 471 "Abstract Algebra III" "Prerequisite: MATH 470 or equivalent. Rings and modules; structure theorem of modules over principal ideal domains. Noetherian rings and modules (including Hilbert basis theorem for rings and modules). Hilberts Nullstellensatz."
MATH 472 "Abstract Algebra IV" "Prerequisite: MATH 470 or equivalent. Elements of field and Galois theory, including straight-edge-and-compass construction and unsolvability of equations of fifth degree by radicals."
MATH 473 "Partial Differential Equations" "Prerequisite: MATH 370 or equivalent. Canonical forms for second order linear equations with constant coefficients, classification of linear second order equations, method of separation of variables, first order PDEs, method of characteristics. Non-linear first order equations, complete integrals, Cauchy conditions, Cauchy-Kowalewski theorem, Fourier and Laplace transforms, Greens functions, integral representations, introduction to non-linear PDEs."
MATH 474 "Linear and Non-Linear Dynamical Systems" "Prerequisite: MATH 265, 365 or equivalent, or permission of the Department. Systems of linear differential equations; fundamental matrices; non-homogeneous linear systems; non-linear systems; solutions and trajectories; the phase plane; stability concepts; Liapounovs second method; periodic solutions and limit cycles; introduction to boundary-value problems and Sturm-Liouville theory."
MATH 475 "Discrete Dynamical Systems, Chaos and Fractals" "Prerequisite: MATH 265, 365 or equivalent, or permission of the Department. Introduction to discrete dynamical modelling; periodic points; bifurcation; period three points; symbolic dynamics; chaos; transitivity; conjugacy; complex behaviour; introduction to fractals; computer simulations."
MATH 478 "Non-Linear Programming" "Prerequisite: MATH 361 or permission of the Department. Classical methods of optimization, Lagrange multipliers, Kuhn-Tucker conditions; line search methods, quadratic programming, gradient methods, introduction to dynamic programming."
MATH 479 "Convex and Non-Linear Analysis" "Prerequisite: MATH 365 or permission of the Department. Support and separation of convex sets, extreme point characterizations, convex and dual cones, Farkas theorem; minimax theorem of Game Theory, Legendre-Fenchel conjugate, infimal convolution, subgradient calculus; Lagrangians, necessary and sufficient conditions for optimality in constrained minimization; the dual problem."
MATH 480 "Geometry and Topology" "Prerequisite: MATH 252, 365, 369. This is an introductory course in the geometric topology and differential geometry of surfaces. The topics covered will be selected from curvature, Theorema Egregium, Gauss-Bonnet theorem, Euler characteristic, cohomology, homotopy groups, the applications of ideas and techniques from geometry and topology in knot or graph theory and map colourings."
MATH 494 "Topics in Pure and Applied Mathematics" ""
MATH 495 "Reading Course in Pure and Applied Mathematics" ""
MATH 496 "Honours Project in Pure and Applied Mathematics" ""
STAT 249 "Probability I" "Prerequisite: MATH 264 or equivalent previously or concurrently. Axiomatic approach to probability; combinatorial probability; discrete and continuous distributions; expectation; conditional expectation; random sampling and sampling distributions."
STAT 250 "Statistics" "Prerequisite: STAT 249 or equivalent or permission of the Department; MATH 265 or equivalent previously or concurrently. Point and interval estimation; hypothesis testing; Neyman Pearson Lemma and likelihood ratio tests; introduction to correlation and regression."
STAT 287 "Statistics Lab I" "This lab is associated with STAT 249 and 250 and features problem-solving sessions for the probability examination of the Society of Actuaries and the Casualty Actuarial Society."
STAT 342 "Industrial Statistics" "Prerequisite: STAT 250 or MAST 333. Concepts of statistical quality control; X-bar, R, P, and C control charts, acceptance sampling, sampling inspection, continuous sampling plans."
STAT 343 "Sample Survey Theory and Applications" "Prerequisite: STAT 250 or MAST 333. Basic sampling designs and estimators; simple random sampling, stratified, cluster and systematic sampling. Sampling with unequal probabilities; ratio and regression methods of estimation."
STAT 347 "Introduction to Non-Parametric Statistics" "Prerequisite: STAT 250 or MAST 333. Theory of rank tests, sign test, Mann-Whitney and Wilcoxon one-sample and two-sample tests, Kruskal-Wallis test, goodness of fit tests, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, Pearson chi-square test, rank correlation and Kendalls tau."
STAT 349 "Probability II" "Prerequisite: STAT 249 or equivalent. Markov decision process and applications. Poisson process, queuing theory, inventory theory; applications."
STAT 360 "Linear Models" "Prerequisite: STAT 250 or equivalent. Least-squares estimators and their properties. General linear model with full rank. Analysis of residuals; adequacy of model, lack of fit test, weighted least squares; stepwise regression, Durbin-Watson statistic; one way and two way analysis of variance."
STAT 388 "Statistics Lab II" "This lab will use various softwares such as SYSTAT, SAS, SPLUS, MINITAB for data analysis."
STAT 449 "Advanced Probability" "Prerequisite: STAT 250, 349. Central limit theorems and law of large numbers, convergence of random variables, characteristic function, moment generating function, probability generating functions, random walk and reflection principle."
STAT 450 "Mathematical Statistics" "Prerequisite: STAT 250, 349 previously or concurrently, or permission of the Department. Derivation of standard sampling distributions; distribution of order-statistics; estimation, properties of estimators; Rao-Cramer inequality, Rao-Blackwell theorem, maximum likelihood and method of moments estimation, Neyman-Pearson theory, likelihood ratio tests and their properties."
STAT 452 "Introduction to Stochastic Processes" "Prerequisite: STAT 449. Continuous stochastic processes. Poisson processes, continuous time Markov process, queuing models, birth and death processes, renewal theory."
STAT 460 "Time Series and Forecasting" "Prerequisite: STAT 360. Time series, forecasting by trend and irregular components (using multiple regression analysis and exponential smoothing); forecasting seasonal time series, additive and multiplicative decomposition methods, Box-Jenkins methodology, moving average, autoregressive and mixed models."
STAT 461 "Statistical Simulation" "Prerequisite: STAT 349. Simulation and Monte-Carlo techniques; selected topics in operations research."
STAT 465 "Multivariate Statistics" "Prerequisite: MATH 252; STAT 360 or equivalent. Multivariate normal distribution; estimation and testing of hypothesis about mean vector; multiple and partial correlation; MANOVA; principal components analysis."
STAT 468 "Design of Experiments" "Prerequisite: STAT 360. Construction and analysis of standard designs, including balanced designs; block designs; orthogonal designs; response surface designs."
STAT 480 "Statistical Data Analysis" "Prerequisite: STAT 360 or permission of the Department. The analysis of real life data sets using statistical software packages in SAS or R. Topics involve techniques from generalized linear models, model selection, log-linear models for categorical data, logistic regression, survival models."
STAT 497 "Topics in Statistics" ""
STAT 498 "Reading Course in Statistics" ""
STAT 499 "Honours Project in Statistics" ""
ADMI 202 "Perspective on Canadian Business(Administered by the Finance Department)" "This course is designed to review the historical development of business in Canada and to examine the relationships between the firm (management) and the owners, the employees, the customers, the government, and the community. Further, it studies some of the problems facing Canadian business today: the dehumanizing aspect, pollution problems, large vs. small firms, foreign ownership, and competition."
AHSC 220 "Lifespan Growth and Development for Practitioners" "This survey course provides an interdisciplinary overview of biopsychosocial patterns of development over the lifespan, from conception to death. Students learn about theories of human development, with an emphasis on typical normative development, and on application of theory to practice. The course material covers key issues in development, major milestones of development, and major life events. In addition, students are given opportunities to think critically and to become better able to interpret and assess research within the field."
AHSC 223 "Relationships Across the Lifespan" "This course is designed to provide a theoretical overview of how relationships are formed, sustained, and developed/changed in each stage of human life. A variety of theories and perspectives are explored."
AHSC 225 "Principles of Experiential and Action Learning and the Reflective Practitioner" " "
AHSC 230 "Interpersonal Communication and Relationships" "This course is designed to provide knowledge and skill in building and maintaining interpersonal relationships characterized by mutual understanding and respect. Students can expect to enhance their understanding of themselves and their personal styles. The course focuses on effective communication behaviour. Students can expect to improve their abilities to attend to verbal and non-verbal communication; exchange constructive feedback with others; address and deal constructively with conflict; and communicate across differences, such as gender and race. Conceptual perspectives include the contextual influences in relationship dynamics and the role of affect in interpersonal communication. The course also examines value considerations."
AHSC 232 "Working in Task Groups" "Prerequisite: AHSC 230. This course is an introduction to understanding interaction and developmental processes of small groups and skill-building for effective participation. It enables students to learn frameworks for observing a groups process, member roles that facilitate positive group processes and task accomplishment, and models of intervention in small groups. The course provides opportunities for students to integrate the theory they learn with their experiences in a task group."
AHSC 241 "Recreation and Leisure in Contemporary Society" "This course introduces students to the theories and relationships of play, perceptions of free and discretionary time, concepts of leisure, and the historical foundations for the discipline. The concepts are presented as integral components of todays lifestyle. In addition, the organized recreation system is examined, with an introduction to the leisure services delivery system. The students also examine the role that leisure plays in current societal issues."
AHSC 260 "Program Planning, Design and Evaluation" "The course prepares students to construct effective interactive programs designed for specific client populations. Using program design principles and practices, students match learning activities to desired program outcomes, while considering participant qualities and contextual features. Emphasis is placed on assessment, design, and evaluation knowledge and skills."
AHSC 270 "Introduction to Human Relations Theory and Research" "This course is an introduction to general systems theory and change from an interventionist perspective, as well as an orientation to various unique human systems. It focuses on understanding applied social science research and examines general strategies of intervention and salient models of practice, exposing students to varied domains of application. The course also features attention to values and ethical issues associated with specific practice and intervention strategies and the role of social justice andanti-oppressive approaches."
AHSC 281 "Introduction to Therapeutic Recreation" "An examination of the fundamental concepts of therapeutic recreation. Included is the study of the historical foundations and the basic terminology, purposes, and theories of therapeutic recreation."
AHSC 298 "Selected Topics in Applied Human Sciences" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
AHSC 310 "Tourism in Canada" "This course presents an examination of the tourism industry in Canada, including concepts, research, practices, and promotion. Topics covered include destination motivation, commercial recreation, business travel, trends in tourism development, government agencies, the economics of promotion, social objectives, market segmentation, and ethical and legal considerations."
AHSC 311 "Respecting Diversity in Human Relations" "Prerequisite: 24 university credits including AHSC 230. This course examines the role of interconnected identity-related differences, such as age, culture, disability, ethnicity, gender, geographical location, health status, history, language, power, race, religion, sexual orientation, social class, and privilege in human relationships and human systems. Students learn about histories of oppression and marginalization in Canada, theories of diversity and difference, as well as the impact of social justice movements and being and becoming an ally. Students are given opportunities to develop critical thinking and analytic skills and respect for difference and diversity."
AHSC 312 "Sexuality in Human Relations" "Prerequisite: 24 university credits including AHSC 220, 230 or enrolment in the Major or Minor in Interdisciplinary Studies in Sexuality. This course provides students with knowledge of physical and psychosocial aspects of sexuality in relationships through life and examines values, attitudes, and issues related to the development and expression of sexuality. Topics include gender, family, cultural and media influences; historically and culturally based attitudes; prevention and sexually transmitted diseases; self-perception and identity in sexuality; and emotion and sexuality. The course aims to foster respect for persons and diversity."
AHSC 313 "Family Communication" "Prerequisite: AHSC 220, AHSC 230. This course is a requirement for students enrolled in the Certificate in Family Life Education. This course is an examination of patterns, effective approaches, and issues in communication among persons in primary partnerships and families. It also explores topics such as diversity in forms of family, decision-making, problem-solving, power relations, gender issues, managing differences in expectations, and the influences of cultural, social, and economic contexts."
AHSC 314 "Adolescence: Issues and Intervention" "Prerequisite: AHSC 220. This course links knowledge of adolescent development to a more detailed examination of related adolescent patterns and issues, including peer relations and friendship, parental and family relations, identity, sexuality and gender, and socio-economic and cultural influences. Directed towards students interested in working with adolescents, the course combines theoretical and practical knowledge relating to adolescents, their parents and their concerns for the purpose of enhancing the adolescent experience."
AHSC 315 "Interviewing" "Prerequisite: AHSC 230. This course reviews different forms and concepts relevant to interviewing for use in work and community settings. It examines communication influences on the interviewer and interviewee and the limitations of different interview approaches. It enables students to structure and design interviews, to build rapport, and to manage information flow."
AHSC 316 "Adulthood: Patterns and Transitions" "Prerequisite: AHSC 220. This course examines relationships, transitions, and developmental change through early adulthood and middle age. Relevant adult development theories are reviewed. Students explore the nature and significance of close relationships, life transitions, choices and contextual influences. This course includes a consideration of the societal values inherent in notions of maturity, optimal environments, and interventions to enhance quality of life."
AHSC 319 "Older Adulthood: Issues and Intervention" "Prerequisite: AHSC 220. This course explores developmental change patterns and differences among people in older adulthood. Topics include retirement and pensions, concepts of health, fitness, well-being and models of health care, housing and transportation, leisure, family and social relations, ethnicity and aging, loss and grief, death and dying. Designed for persons interested in working with older adults, the course fosters awareness of myths, stereotypes and ageism, and emphasizes an attention to community social support and interventions which are enabling."
AHSC 320 "Family and Youth Legislation" "Prerequisite: AHSC 220. This course reviews all aspects of federal and provincial legislation that impact on practice with families. Legislation governing marriage, divorce and custody, family violence, child and youth protection and placement, youth crime, child advocacy and the challenges of working with families in relation to the legislation, are presented with a particular focus on the rights of children and the legal responsibilities of practitioners."
AHSC 321 "Historical Foundations of Leisure and Recreation " "Prerequisite: AHSC 241. This course offers an overview of leisure and recreation throughout history, highlighting selected major trends among different historical eras. This includes the historical and philosophical roots of leisure, the conditions in society that have affected leisure, the responses to those conditions, and the role of leisure in contemporary life. This course offers an opportunity to analyze the values, beliefs and ethics relating to leisure that shape modern traditions and cultures."
AHSC 322 "Fundamentals of Child- and Youth-Care Work" "Prerequisite: AHSC 220. The objectives of this course are to provide students with an understanding of the scope and status of child- and youth-care work, to sensitize them to the necessary competencies and daily challenges of this work in a range of settings, and to review relevant theory. An overview of the history of the field is provided, as well as a review of seminal writings and recent literature on best practices."
AHSC 323 "Gender and Leisure" "Prerequisite: 24 university credits including AHSC 241 or 242. This course focuses on theory and empirical research concerning the relationships between gender and leisure. This includes topics such as the effect of gender on leisure meanings, constraints to leisure, and participation in leisure. In addition, this course explores the cultural influences of leisure related to gender identity and gender relations. As part of this, the course explores the role that leisure plays as a significant site for the social construction and contestation of gender. Emphasis is placed on understanding ways in which gender relations and gender role expectations affect and are affected by leisure."
AHSC 330 "Leadership and Facilitation in Small Groups" "Prerequisite: AHSC 232, 260. This course develops facilitative skills and approaches to leadership in small groups. Students learn effective ways to observe and to interpret the significance of group behaviour for the purpose of intervening effectively. It introduces students to program design theory for human and social service organizations and program design principles and practices relevant to small group learning. The course highlights factors optimizing participation, patterns of communication and influence, decision-making, problem-solving, collaborative planning, conflict management, and effects of gender and other identity-related differences. Students identify their leadership styles and group facilitation skills to develop flexibility in adapting to diverse group situations."
AHSC 332 "Organization Development I" "Prerequisite: AHSC 230, 270. This course introduces students to the characteristics of organizations as open systems. The evolution of organization development and the principle theories and perspectives that have helped to define the field are studied. Organization development methods as well as criteria for examining organizational effectiveness, underlying beliefs, values, and assumptions are examined. It introduces students to training and design theories relevant to organizational learning. Key concepts covered are organization vision, mission and goals, and organization norms and culture."
AHSC 333 "Leisure and the Environment" "Prerequisite: 24 university credits including AHSC 241 or 242. This course examines the state of the natural environment, and explains how leisure service providers play a crucial leadership role in fulfilling the needs of both the public and the environment."
AHSC 335 "Power and Conflict Resolution in Human Systems" "Prerequisite: 24 university credits. This course gives students a theoretical and practical overview of the role of power and conflict in human relationships and human systems  groups, organizations, and communities. The concept of power is explored in depth since the use of power is central in both the creation and the resolution of conflict. The course focuses on the development of analytical tools that serve to identify the different elements leading to, maintaining or escalating conflicts. Particular attention is given to ethics associated with the use of power and management of conflict."
AHSC 343 "Community Development I" "Prerequisite: AHSC 230, 270. This course examines the field of community development through the presentation of basic models. The examination of these models in historical and environmental contexts focuses on understanding how they reflect different views of social relationships. Students explore different approaches to working with communities and the implications for practice. The course introduces students to design theory relevant to community development. Students also examine ways of analyzing and defining community resources, problems, and issues."
AHSC 350 "Leisure Education" "Prerequisite: AHSC 241, 260. This course offers an introduction to the field of leisure education. The history and underlying philosophy of the concept is presented. The roles of the school, community, and community-serving agencies are examined. Existing models are analyzed and discussed."
AHSC 355 "Foundations of Family Life Education" "Prerequisite: AHSC 232, 260, 313. This course examines Family Life Education from its inception as a field of practice to its current status in North America. It highlights complex related issues and the role of the educator, including attention to personal values and ethical principles of the practitioner. Topics include distinctions between prevention education and therapeutic intervention, and an overview of the range of different family life education programs and current practices."
AHSC 360 "Play, Adult Learning and Development" "Prerequisite: 24 university credits including AHSC 220. This course examines the concept of play in adult learning and development. Gender, age, ethnic and social class diversity are explored as they relate to adult play behaviour."
AHSC 361 "Leisure Services Leadership" "Prerequisite: AHSC 230, 241. This course offers an analysis of leadership theory and its application to leisure services. Major topics are the principles and practices of leadership, group dynamics, leadership skill development and program planning, and the unique role of the leisure leader."
AHSC 370 "Organizational Development and Change: Models and Methods" "Prerequisite: AHSC 270, 332. The focus of this course is on the practice of human system intervention from a pragmatic as well as a theoretical perspective. The course emphasizes collaborative strategies for effecting change in human systems within a broad range of intervention alternatives. It focuses on the interventionists role in effective change strategy development, initiation, management, and evaluation. The course is taught with a special focus on personal and professional values and ethical issues related to human systems intervention."
AHSC 371 "Community Recreation Planning" "Prerequisite: AHSC 241, 260. The course focuses on the application of recreation planning, theory, and skills. It examines methods and procedures used to assess client needs, design and deliver programs and services, and evaluate their impact. Practical experience is gained through a combination of field experience, project planning, and group work."
AHSC 380 "Quantitative Research Methods for Practitioners" "Prerequisite: 24 university credits including AHSC 260. This course gives an overview of a range of data collection and analysis strategies which are relevant to collaborative and participative intervention practice. It examines practical considerations for selecting specific quantitative approaches and prepares students to formulate and administer intervention-related questionnaires, to conduct basic quantitative analyses, and to present data results to interested individuals and groups. The course also examines basic ethical requirements in conducting applied social research."
AHSC 381 "Concepts in Therapeutic Recreation Programming" "Prerequisite: AHSC 241, 260, 281. This course explores current therapeutic recreation practices with emphasis on rehabilitation in community and clinical settings such as hospitals, group homes, psychiatric centres, rehabilitation clinics, and correctional centres. Leisure planning and assessment models are studied to identify the modes of recreational activity which may be used as an intervention."
AHSC 382 "Qualitative Research Methods for Practitioners" "Prerequisite: 24 university credits including AHSC 260. This course gives an overview of a range of qualitative approaches to practical projects and interventions.It prepares students to design and conduct interviews (including making decisions about respondent selection) with individuals and in focus groups, as well as participant observation. It also enables students to analyze qualitative data from these sources as well as documentary sources in light of practical project purposes. The course highlights special ethical considerations in conducting qualitative forms of applied social research."
AHSC 383 "Therapeutic Recreation and Physical Disabilities" "Prerequisite: AHSC 220, 281. This course gives an overview of the role and impact of therapeutic recreation services for individuals with physical disabilities and limitations. It analyzes the barriers to recreation participation along with the planning and designing of a safe and accessible recreational environment."
AHSC 384 "Therapeutic Recreation: Cognitive Disabilities and Illness" "Prerequisite: AHSC 220, 281. This course gives an overview of the role of therapeutic recreation services for individuals with cognitive disabilities and limitations or illness. It focuses on the etiology, impact, and barriers related to specific conditions. It also studies legislation trends and resources for community recreation integration and the role of transitional programs."
AHSC 385 "Social Psychology of Leisure" "Prerequisite: 24 university credits including AHSC 241. This course deepens students understanding of how personal and social factors shape individuals perceptions and experiences of recreation and leisure. Students engage in a critical review of current theory and research focusing on the relationship between leisure and individual functioning, and applications to human problems associated with leisure."
AHSC 398 "Selected Topics in Applied Human Sciences" ""
AHSC 399 "Selected Topics in Applied Human Sciences" ""
AHSC 400 "Advanced Facilitation and Ethics" "Prerequisite: AHSC 330. This course examines in-depth special challenges in facilitating groups (e.g. youth groups, workplace training, and education programs) and develops advanced skills in facilitation and the development of process tools and designs. Special consideration is given to planning for diversity, working with difficult group dynamics, and other factors. Ethical principles and practices of working with people are also explored."
AHSC 403 "Cultivating Creativity and Social Innovation " "Prerequisite: AHSC 232 or 361. This course explores the multi-faceted nature of creativity and its cultivation as a method of personal and professional development. Drawing upon current theories and conceptions about creativity, both individual and social, this course identifies strategies to enhance creativity in human systems in order to improve engagement and quality of life. Social innovation as a dimension of community and organizational creativity is examined in depth."
AHSC 411 "Social Change and Analysis Methods" "Prerequisite: AHSC 260; 332 or 343. This course is designed to enhance students knowledge and practical abilities in social analysis and community-based research methods as tools for promoting social change in community and organizational contexts. It includes hands-on opportunities to design and present social analysis methods. Course readings include practical and analytical materials."
AHSC 415 "Organizational and Community Sustainability" "Prerequisite: 45 university credits; AHSC 270 or LOYC 320. This course addresses the requirements and processes necessary to build organizational and community sustainable goals in co-operation with surrounding communities. It provides an introduction to the development of integrated social sustainability and sustainable organizational practices, including sustainability evaluations, the assessment of organizational sustainability status and goals, goal setting, and change processes within a broader, sustainable community context. It acknowledges an integration of multiple layers of organizational (private and public organizations) and community sustainability including recycling and waste awareness, best sustainable practices in industries and logistics, biodiversity, human diversity and social innovation in the context of sustainable development of communities and organizations."
AHSC 421 "Political and Legal Aspects of Leisure Services" "Prerequisite: 30 university credits including AHSC 241. This course provides students with a theoretical understanding of the complexity of providing leisure services in the province of Quebec. The course examines the administration of leisure services in municipal, regional, provincial, and federal governments. The course examines law as it applies to aspects of recreational activities in the areas of organization, supervision, and participation. The course covers the Quebec Civil Code, the Canadian Constitution, and the Quebec and Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms as they apply to the study of leisure."
AHSC 422 "Youth and Leisure" "Prerequisite: 30 university credits including AHSC 220, 241, 260. This course develops an understanding of the leisure needs of youth from emotional, physical, psychological, and sociological perspectives. Major areas of discussion include leisure preferences and needs assessment, strategies for programming, dealing with youth-at-risk, and recreational opportunities for youth. Lectures and laboratory."
AHSC 425 "Organization Development II" "Prerequisite: AHSC 330 previously or concurrently; AHSC 332. This course provides students with the opportunity to apply organization development concepts and strategies to effect change in organizations. Using theoretical, case, and experiential approaches, the focus of instruction progressively guides the student through the stages of organization development. Concepts covered include entry and contracting, identifying organizational issues and goals for change, collecting and analyzing pertinent organizational data, and diagnosis and feedback to the client. Opportunities for the development of change-agent skills are provided through the emphasis on in-class applications."
AHSC 427 "Administration of Leisure Services" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits including AHSC 361; AHSC 371 or 381. This course offers an analysis of the processes involved in planning and managing leisure service delivery systems. Topics to be studied include principles of planning, organization, budgeting, and supervision."
AHSC 431 "Recreation and Leisure Studies Seminar" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits including AHSC 321, 361, 371, 385. This is a third-year interdisciplinary seminar in which students can tie together all they have learned in the Recreation and Leisure Studies program. Additionally, students are set on a course of study that should continue after they graduate so that they can keep up with future developments in this area."
AHSC 432 "Seminar in Therapeutic Recreation" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits including AHSC 321, 361, 381, 383, 384. This is a third-year interdisciplinary seminar in which students can tie together all that they have learned in the Therapeutic Recreation program. Additionally, students are set on a course of study that should continue after they graduate so that they can keep up with future developments in this area."
AHSC 435 "Fieldwork Practice" "Prerequisite: AHSC 330. This course must be taken in final year. This course provides an opportunity for students to integrate theory into practice in the design, facilitation and evaluation of small group process. Students lead one small task or learning group in a community, an organizational or an institutional setting. The fieldwork is combined with class sessions for orientation, supervision, reflection and evaluation."
AHSC 436 "Internship in Youth and Family Work" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits including AHSC 330; AHSC 322 or 355; and AHSC 465 previously or concurrently; permission of the Department. This course is one of two internship options for students enrolled in the Specialization in Human Relations. This internship provides students with a supervised opportunity to apply learning from the BA Specialization in Human Relations to work with youth and families in a range of settings such as child welfare, schools, non-profit organizations, residential care, or outreach. The specific objectives are to teach about planning, education, and intervention in human service work, to promote self-reflection as a critical component of ethical practice, and to provide a basis for further career planning and/or graduate work in youth and family practice."
AHSC 437 "Internship in Recreation and Leisure Studies" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits including AHSC 361, 371; permission of the Department. This course provides students with an opportunity to design, implement, and evaluate programs; to facilitate groups in a variety of settings; and to establish working relationships with field personnel. In consultation with their supervisors, students select a site related to their learning interests. Students learn to develop and manage their own project and to self-assess their work. The course includes fieldwork, seminars, and team meetings."
AHSC 438 "Internship in Therapeutic Recreation" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits including AHSC 361, 381, 383, 384; permission of the Department. This course provides students with an opportunity to design, implement, and evaluate programs, to facilitate groups in a variety of settings, and to establish working relationships with field personnel. In consultation with their supervisors, students select a site related to their learning interests. Students learn to develop and manage their own project and to self-assess their work. The course includes fieldwork, seminars, and team meetings."
AHSC 439 "Internship in Human Relations" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits including AHSC 330; and either AHSC 225 and 400, 332 and 425, or 343 and 445 previously or concurrently; permission of the Department. This course is one of two internship options for students enrolled in the Specialization in Human Relations. This course provides students with an opportunity to design, implement, and evaluate small group leadership in several settings, and to negotiate working relationships with site personnel. Students will be solely responsible for facilitating several task or learning groups in community, work, or educational settings. The sites will be selected according to students learning interests and in consultation with the course instructor. The course includes supervisory team meetings and internship seminar sessions."
AHSC 442 "Community Development and Leisure" "Prerequisite: 30 university credits including AHSC 361; 371 or 381. This course involves the examination of philosophical and theoretical community development approaches in the field of leisure studies. Students explore the numerous elements of community development practice including citizen engagement, relationship building, and community capacity. Students develop their understanding of current trends in community development and critically examine its implications for practice in the context of leisure."
AHSC 444 "The Older Adult and Leisure" "Prerequisite: 30 university credits including AHSC 220, 241, 260. This course examines the aging process in the physical, cognitive, and affective domains. It familiarizes the student with the characteristics of the aging population as related to leisure, recreation, and lifestyle. It focuses on developing and understanding the impact of lifelong leisure in the aging process. The course reviews issues related to the phenomenon of leisure in retirement and discusses the process of delivering leisure services to older individuals."
AHSC 445 "Community Development II" "Prerequisite: AHSC 330 previously or concurrently; AHSC 343. This course focuses on how to intervene in community contexts; identify community structures and inter-group dynamics relevant to intervention planning; gather and organize data for use by communities; develop intervention plans that involve the community each step of the way and that foster leadership within its ranks; and evaluate an intervention. Attention is given to cultural diversity and value differences."
AHSC 450 "Leisure Assessment and Counselling" "Prerequisite: 30 university credits including AHSC 281. This course focuses on the use of assessment applied to individual leisure abilities, interests and needs, and the application of counselling theory to the field of leisure services. A variety of assessment tools are analyzed/interpreted. Theories, models, and methods of leisure counselling are discussed."
AHSC 451 "Counselling Skills and Concepts" "Prerequisite: 45 university credits including AHSC 220, 230. This course advances students understanding of core counselling theories and develops an understanding for theoretical and value frameworks of the helping relationship. It fosters the application of essential helping relationship skills applicable in everyday relationships in work and social settings. Skill areas include attending skills, such as attending to non-verbal behaviour, reflection of content, reflection of feeling, paraphrasing and summarizing; and influencing skills, such as interpretation and analysis. Also highlighted are ethical issues and attention to cultural differences."
AHSC 456 "Advanced Family Life Education" "Prerequisite: AHSC 355. This course covers families decision-making processes related to the utilization of financial, personal, environmental, and social resources, including time, money, material assets, energy, friends, neighbours, and space, to meet their goals. In particular, this course focuses on how families develop, exchange, and allocate resources throughout the lifespan with the expectation that effective resource management decisions are made from positions of knowledge and understanding."
AHSC 460 "Health Promotion" "Prerequisite: 30 university credits including AHSC 230. This course helps students to develop intervention skills and theoretical understanding in the area of health promotion. It is of particular interest to students whose career interests involve lifestyle planning, health promotion, and stress management. Topics include health and wellness, stress and illness, psychological and physical self-appraisal processes, psychosomatic processes and disorders, understanding addictions and their management, health-promotion interventions, behavioural self-management, and issues in medical/psychological health compliance. Healthy workplace practices and the promotion of community wellness are emphasized."
AHSC 465 "Parent-Child Relations" "Prerequisite: 45 university credits including AHSC 232, 313, 380. This course provides an advanced understanding of parenting theories, research, and applications in the context of parent-child relations over the life span. Topics include parenting rights and responsibilities, parenting practices and programs, high-risk parenting, and parental assessment."
AHSC 470 "Basic Human Relations Laboratory" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits including AHSC 330. This is an intensive format six-day learning session through which students may expect to increase their awareness of how their behaviour affects others, increase their skill and understanding of effectively and responsibly communicating to and exchanging feedback with others, increase their understanding of leadership and authority relations, and deepen their understanding of group dynamics."
AHSC 475 "Organizational and Community Leadership: A Systems Approach" "Prerequisite: AHSC 330. This course is an introduction to the practice of leadership in organizations and communities with a human systems approach and perspective. It examines a range of theoretical concepts current in organizational leadership practice including systems thinking, team-based leadership, transformational models of leadership, and strategy formulation from a leadership perspective. It provides an opportunity for students to examine ethics, values, and abilities required in organizational leadership today."
AHSC 490 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 30 university credits; permission of the Department. Students work on topics in consultation with a study supervisor. The study may include readings, field studies, and/or research."
AHSC 491 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: 30 university credits; permission of the Department. A student who has received credit for AHSC 490 may register for AHSC 491."
AHSC 498 "Advanced Topics in Applied Human Sciences" ""
AHSC 499 "Advanced Topics in Applied Human Sciences" ""
ARTE 201 "Art in Early Childhood I " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Early Childhood or Major in Child Studies, or written permission of the Department. An introductory study of the art-making process in early childhood. This course is a studio workshop which investigates potential media and teaching approaches appropriate for the young child."
ARTE 202 "Art in Early Childhood II" "Prerequisite: ARTE 201. A continuation of ARTE 201."
ARTE 203 "Arts in Recreation" "In this workshop/seminar course, students are introduced to various art forms currently used in recreation centres. Intrinsic to the course content is a consideration of the role of the arts in recreation and leisure populations."
ARTE 220 "Foundations of Art Education" "A survey of content and contexts of the art education profession. In studio activities, students explore art-making skills and techniques, creative expression, artistic heritage and art in society. This content is related to lesson planning for schools, museums, and community settings. Students are introduced to childrens artistic development as well as basic management and safety standards for the art classroom. Practicum experiences will include observation of childrens art processes and some teaching."
ARTE 230 "Practicum: Observation and Analysis of Childrens Learning" "Prerequisite: ARTE 220. This practicum course gives students first-hand experience and knowledge of childrens learning as it occurs in the schools. It also provides students with a theoretical framework for observing and analyzing individual and group learning processes in the art classroom. It permits students to develop preliminary skills in assessing and meeting the needs of individual children. Students are introduced to methods for evaluating learning and for critically reflecting on learning and teaching. The practicum experience consists of a placement in a primary school one day a week for a total of 70 hours."
ARTE 320 "Multidisciplinary Approaches to Art and Teaching" "Prerequisite: ARTE 230 or written permission of the Department. This course investigates various creative, historical, and critical approaches to art as a basis for developing curriculum content. Students expand their repertoire of skills and techniques for planning and teaching lessons with multiple dimensions. Students also consider the specific requirements of students with special needs and those at different age levels. This course includes a practicum component."
ARTE 330 "Introduction to Community Art Education" "Prerequisite: ARTE 320 or written permission of the Department. The course investigates the various issues and concerns related to community art education. Students develop skills in assessing community needs. After observation and studio research, students develop and propose an art education curriculum for a specific community setting or population. This course includes a practicum component."
ARTE 340 "Art Education for Adolescents and Adults" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in the Major or Specialization in Art Education  Visual Arts. Students are introduced to theories of adolescent and adult development, and the effect these have on their behaviour and attitudes towards learning and art making. Students learn about different types of group management and support techniques appropriate for adolescent and adult students. The course presents ways to effectively integrate aspects of popular culture into curriculum planning."
ARTE 352 "Light-Based Media" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in the Major or Specialization in Art Education  Visual Arts, or permission of the Department. Students develop proficiency in a variety of imaging processes, including traditional and digital photography, that are suitable for school or community art education programs. Students investigate related approaches to teaching and curriculum."
ARTE 354 "Time-Based Media" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in the Major or Specialization in Art Education  Visual Arts, or permission of the Department. Students develop proficiency in a variety of time-based media, including video and multimedia installations that are suitable for school or community art education programs. Students investigate related approaches to teaching and curriculum."
ARTE 398 "Special Topics in Art Education" "This course provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of art education. Topics chosen for consideration vary from year to year."
ARTE 420 "Art Education for Elementary School" "Prerequisite: ARTE 330. Students apply theories of development and learning to design appropriate lessons for elementary school practicum settings. The course explores currently available teaching resources such as textbooks, MEES curriculum, and communication technologies. The course also investigates processes and procedures for assessment appropriate to an elementary art classroom."
ARTE 421 "Practicum in the Elementary School" "Prerequisite: ARTE 330. Student teachers observe and assist an elementary school classroom teacher in the development and implementation of an effective art program during a practicum of 140 hours. Student teachers also observe the social and cultural dynamics of the school and initiate positive interactions with their students and professional colleagues."
ARTE 422 "Art Education in the Secondary School I" "Prerequisite: ARTE 434. A lecture/seminar course where students identify themes and concerns that are appropriate to secondary-school students with diverse backgrounds. Students explore the currently available teaching resources such as MEES curriculum and others, textbooks and communication technology."
ARTE 423 "Practicum in the Secondary School I" "Prerequisite: ARTE 420, 434; EDUC 200. Student teachers observe and assist a secondary-school art specialist in the development and implementation of an effective art program during a practicum of 140 hours. Student teachers also observe the social and cultural dynamics of the school and initiate positive interactions with their students and professional colleagues."
ARTE 424 "Art Education in the Secondary School II" "Prerequisite: ARTE 422. The course concentrates on the objectives, goals, and content of the "
ARTE 425 "Practicum in the Secondary School II" "Prerequisite: ARTE 423. This course is a 350-hour teaching practicum in a secondary school. Student teachers implement curriculum planning and classroom management that respects ethnic, socio-economic, and cultural diversity, and that successfully integrates students with special needs. Student teachers also apply safe use of art materials and appropriate art learning assessment procedures."
ARTE 432 "Community Art Education: Theory and Practice" "Prerequisite: ARTE 330 or written permission of the Department. Students connect theory and practice by planning and teaching appropriate art events for a particular community setting or population. Students investigate organizational and administrative approaches necessary for successful community art education programming. This course includes a practicum component."
ARTE 434 "Professional Practice for Art Educators" "Prerequisite: ARTE 420 or 432. Students develop, teach, and then evaluate an art program during a practicum in a community setting. Students formulate and express a philosophy of teaching art in a community setting that connects theory, critical thinking, reflective practice and fieldwork experience. Students investigate entrepreneurial skills needed to market community art programs. Students must complete a practicum in a community setting."
ARTE 498 "Special Topics in Inter-Related Media and Technologies" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in the Major or Specialization in Art Education  Visual Arts, or permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of art education. Topics chosen for consideration vary from year to year."
ARTH 262 "Aspects of the History of Drawing (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 263 "Aspects of the History of the Print (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 264 "Aspects of the History of Ceramics (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 265 "Aspects of the History of Sculpture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 266 "Aspects of the History of Fibre Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 267 "Aspects of the History of Photography (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 348 "Special Topics in Art and Film (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 349 "Studies in the History of the Print (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 350 "Studies in the History of Ceramics (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 351 "Studies in the History of Sculpture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 352 "Studies in the History of Fibre Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 353 "Technology and Contemporary Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 354 "Studies in Interdisciplinarity in the Visual Arts (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 355 "Studies in Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 356 "Studies in the Materials and Processes of Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 357 "Studies in the History of Craft and the Decorative Arts (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 358 "Studies in the History of Media Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 359 "Studies in Contemporary Photographic Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 448 "Advanced Seminar in Art and Film (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 270 "Icons of Architectural History (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 360 "Studies in Ancient Greek Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 361 "Studies in Ancient Roman Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 362 "Studies in Early Christian and Byzantine Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 363 "Studies in Medieval Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 364 "Studies in Renaissance Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 365 "Studies in 17th- and 18th-Century Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 366 "Studies in 19th-Century Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 367 "Studies in 20th-Century Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 368 "Studies in Contemporary Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 369 "Studies in Near Eastern Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 450 "Advanced Seminar in the History of Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 498 "Special Topics in the History of Art and Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 271 "Introduction to Canadian Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 272 "From Realism to Abstraction in Canadian Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 370 "Studies in Canadian Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 371 "Studies in Canadian Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 372 "Issues in Contemporary Canadian Architecture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 373 "Issues in Contemporary Canadian Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 374 "Architecture and Urbanism in Montreal (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 375 "Issues in the Montreal Art Milieu (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 376 "Topics in Amerindian and Inuit Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 200 "Perspectives of Art History (6 credits)" ""
ARTH 300 "Art Historical Methods (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 379 "Postcolonial Theory in Art History (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 380 "Histories of Art History (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 381 "Feminism and Art History (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 383 "Art and Philosophy (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 384 "Theories of Representation (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 385 "Colour: Theory and Application in the Visual Arts (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 386 "Art and the Viewer (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 387 "Issues in Art and Criticism (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 389 "Issues in Ethnocultural Art Histories (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 400 "Advanced Seminar in Art Historical Method (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 283 "The Life and Work of ... (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 290 "Art History and Archaeology (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 298 "Special Topics in Genre Studies (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 388 "Narration and Art (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 390 "Art and the Museum (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 391 "Art and Its Changing Contexts (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 392 "Gender Issues in Art and Art History (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 396 "Art and Culture (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 398 "Special Topics in Art and Society (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 401 "Independent Studies in Art History (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 403 "Internship (3 credits)" ""
ARTH 200 "Perspectives of Art History" "A critical overview of the history of art and architecture and a selective examination of canonical figures, movements, periods, and thematic issues."
ARTH 262 "Aspects of the History of Drawing" "A selective examination of drawing as an art form and of its relation to painting and other visual arts."
ARTH 263 "Aspects of the History of the Print" "A selective examination of the development and uses of the print."
ARTH 264 "Aspects of the History of Ceramics" "A selective examination of the development and uses of ceramics."
ARTH 265 "Aspects of the History of Sculpture" "A selective examination of the development and uses of sculpture."
ARTH 266 "Aspects of the History of Fibre Art" "A selective examination of the development of fibre art."
ARTH 267 "Aspects of the History of Photography" "A selective examination of the development and uses of photography."
ARTH 270 "Icons of Architectural History" "A study of key buildings and the vocabulary of architecture."
ARTH 271 "Introduction to Canadian Art" "An introduction to selected subjects and themes in Quebec and Canadian art."
ARTH 272 "From Realism to Abstraction in Canadian Art" "An introduction to ideas and techniques associated with the transition from representationalism to abstraction in 19th- and 20th-century Quebec and Canadian art."
ARTH 283 "The Life and Work of ... " "A critical examination of an artists life and work."
ARTH 290 "Art History and Archaeology" "A selective examination of the relationship between art history and archaeology."
ARTH 298 "Special Topics in Genre Studies" "Topics pertaining to categories of subject matter such as landscape, portraiture, and still life."
ARTH 300 "Art Historical Methods" "Prerequisite: ARTH 200. An in-depth examination of the methods used in art history to analyze and interpret works of art."
ARTH 348 "Special Topics in Art and Film" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Art History and Film Studies; ARTH 200 and FMST 212; or written permission of the program director. A comparative examination of some aspects of art history and film studies."
ARTH 349 "Studies in the History of the Print" "An examination of selected subjects in the history of the print."
ARTH 350 "Studies in the History of Ceramics" "An examination of selected subjects in the history of ceramics."
ARTH 351 "Studies in the History of Sculpture" "An examination of selected subjects in the history of sculpture."
ARTH 352 "Studies in the History of Fibre Art" "An examination of selected subjects in the history of fibre art."
ARTH 353 "Technology and Contemporary Art" "A selective examination of the relationship between technology and contemporary art."
ARTH 354 "Studies in Interdisciplinarity in the Visual Arts" "A selective examination of historical and contemporary art that utilizes a number of media."
ARTH 355 "Studies in Architecture" "An examination of the role and implications of selected materials and technology in architecture."
ARTH 356 "Studies in the Materials and Processes of Art" "An examination of selected historical and contemporary materials and processes of art."
ARTH 357 "Studies in the History of Craft and the Decorative Arts" "Selected subjects in the history of craft and the decorative arts as forms of material culture."
ARTH 358 "Studies in the History of Media Art" "A selective examination of new media art since the 1990s, including the historical development, thematic content, and conceptual strategies for such practices as video art, projection installation and performance, and experimental film."
ARTH 359 "Studies in Contemporary Photographic Art" "A selective examination of recent photographic art."
ARTH 360 "Studies in Ancient Greek Art and Architecture" "Selected subjects in the art and architectural production of Ancient Greece."
ARTH 361 "Studies in Ancient Roman Art and Architecture" "Selected subjects in the art and architectural production of Ancient Rome."
ARTH 362 "Studies in Early Christian and Byzantine Art and Architecture" "Selected subjects in the art and architectural production of Early Christian and Byzantine cultures."
ARTH 363 "Studies in Medieval Art and Architecture" "Selected subjects in the art and architectural production of the Medieval period."
ARTH 364 "Studies in Renaissance Art and Architecture" "Selected subjects in the art and architectural production of 15th- and 16th-century Europe."
ARTH 365 "Studies in 17th- and 18th-Century Art and Architecture" "Selected subjects in the art and architectural production of the 17th and 18th centuries."
ARTH 366 "Studies in 19th-Century Art and Architecture" "Selected subjects in the art and architectural production of the 19th century."
ARTH 367 "Studies in 20th-Century Art and Architecture" "Selected subjects in the art and architectural production of the 20th century."
ARTH 368 "Studies in Contemporary Art and Architecture" "Selected subjects in contemporary art and architectural production."
ARTH 369 "Studies in Near Eastern Art and Architecture" "Selected subjects in the art and architectural production of the Near East."
ARTH 370 "Studies in Canadian Art" "Selected subjects in the art of Canada."
ARTH 371 "Studies in Canadian Architecture" "Selected subjects in the architecture of Canada."
ARTH 372 "Issues in Contemporary Canadian Architecture" "A consideration of specific issues in the practice of recent architecture in Canada."
ARTH 373 "Issues in Contemporary Canadian Art" "A consideration of specific issues in the recent art of Canada."
ARTH 374 "Architecture and Urbanism in Montreal" "The relationship of architecture to issues of urbanism, analyzed through examples from Montreals past and/or present."
ARTH 375 "Issues in the Montreal Art Milieu" "An analysis of specific issues in the historical and/or contemporary Montreal art community."
ARTH 376 "Topics in Amerindian and Inuit Art" "A selective examination of the work of First Nations artists."
ARTH 379 "Postcolonial Theory in Art History" "A critical examination of the key concepts of postcolonial art and theory."
ARTH 380 "Histories of Art History" "The history of art history as a discipline and the concepts of history it uses."
ARTH 381 "Feminism and Art History" "A consideration of feminism in art history."
ARTH 383 "Art and Philosophy" "A consideration of the relationship between philosophy, art theory, and practice."
ARTH 384 "Theories of Representation" "An examination of the different concepts of representation involved in creating, defining, and interpreting an artwork."
ARTH 385 "Colour: Theory and Application in the Visual Arts" "An examination of various theories of colour by artists, philosophers, psychologists, and scientists."
ARTH 386 "Art and the Viewer" "A consideration of the relationships between artwork and audience."
ARTH 387 "Issues in Art and Criticism" "An examination of selected aspects of the relationship between art, aesthetics, and critical writing."
ARTH 388 "Narration and Art" "A critical examination of selected aspects of the relationship between art and its narratives."
ARTH 389 "Issues in Ethnocultural Art Histories" "An analysis of the concepts of ethnic and cultural identity in art and art history."
ARTH 390 "Art and the Museum" "A study of selected issues in museums and related art institutions."
ARTH 391 "Art and Its Changing Contexts" "An investigation of art in its original context and of its changing meanings and uses through time."
ARTH 392 "Gender Issues in Art and Art History" "An examination of gender as a factor in making and interpreting art."
ARTH 396 "Art and Culture" "A critical examination of selected issues in art and its cultural context."
ARTH 398 "Special Topics in Art and Society" "A detailed examination of a selected aspect of art in society."
ARTH 400 "Advanced Seminar in Art Historical Method" "Prerequisite: Third-year* standing in the Major in Art History and written permission of the Department of Art History. A detailed examination of selected aspects of art methodologies."
ARTH 401 "Independent Studies in Art History" "Prerequisite: Third-year* standing in the Major in Art History, and written permission of the Department of Art History. Students are required to prepare a research paper under the supervision of a faculty member."
ARTH 403 "Internship" "Prerequisite: Third-year* standing in the Major in Art History, and written permission of the Department of Art History. A course in the practice of art history. Students are required to work on specific projects under the supervision of a faculty member. The purpose of the internship is to provide graduating students with the opportunity to take on a project in a professional art milieu so as to complement their academic education."
ARTH 448 "Advanced Seminar in Art and Film" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Art History and Film Studies; ARTH 348 or FMST 348; or written permission of the Department of Art History. A seminar designed to permit an in-depth course of study on some aspects of art and film history."
ARTH 450 "Advanced Seminar in the History of Art and Architecture" "Prerequisite: Third-year* standing in the Major in Art History, and written permission of the Department of Art History. A detailed examination of selected aspects of art and architectural history."
ARTH 498 "Special Topics in the History of Art and Architecture" "Prerequisite: 18 credits in Art History, or written permission of the Department of Art History. A course for advanced students which provides for the study of more specialized areas of art."
ARTX 380 "Intermediate Integrated Studio in Contemporary Art Practices" "Prerequisite: Any 200-level studio course offered by the Department of Studio Arts. This is an intermediate studio course in which students explore and develop a self-directed body of work. The content and context of the course are diverse and students use a wide range of approaches to and methodologies for contemporary art production. The course provides students with opportunities to examine potential roles for the artist today and is based on professional practices including art research, artist writings and exhibition projects."
ARTX 398 "Special Topics in Contemporary Studio Arts Practice" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a BFA program or written permission of the Department. This studio course brings together students with a practice based in any of the studio disciplines, and/or who have been following an interdisciplinary practice, allowing discussion and exchange on their work in relation to the aspect of art making that this special topic addresses."
ARTX 399 "Special Topics in Contemporary Studio Arts Practice" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a BFA program or written permission of the Department. This studio course brings together students with a practice based in any of the studio disciplines, and/or who have been following an interdisciplinary practice, allowing discussion and exchange on their work in relation to the aspect of art making that this special topic addresses."
ARTX 480 "Advanced Integrated Studio in Contemporary Art Practices" "Prerequisite: 300-level studio course previously and enrolment in a program offered by the Department of Studio Arts, or written permission of the Department. This course is structured to support advanced students in the development of a mature and self-directed body of work within a transdisciplinary framework."
ARTX 490 "Independent Study " "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level Studio Arts course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in a specific interdisciplinary project under the supervision of a full-time ARTX faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a six-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
ARTX 491 "Independent Study I " "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level Studio Arts course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in a specific interdisciplinary project under the supervision of a full-time ARTX faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
ARTX 492 "Independent Study II " "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level Studio Arts course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in a specific interdisciplinary project under the supervision of a full-time ARTX faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
ARTT 399 "Special Topics in Studio Arts: Ideas and Issues" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a BFA program or written permission of the Department. This seminar course provides the opportunity for students of various studio practices to discuss changing issues in theory/practice. Visual material, directed readings, exhibition visits, and invited speakers will be determined by the special topic."
ARTT 470 "Professional Internship" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in degree requirement and written permission of the Department. Students wishing to work in an internship capacity within an artistic/cultural environment may apply for academic credit. The internship is carried out under the joint supervision of a qualified professional (from within or outside the University) and a full-time Studio Arts faculty member. A clearly defined agreement between the Department, the student, and the artist or institution involved will be arrived at before the internship is undertaken. This agreement should state clearly the nature of the students participation and the hours of work expected. Projects receiving approval for the internship credits must demonstrate appreciable learning potential for the student."
ARTT 471 "Professional Internship I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in degree requirement and written permission of the Department. Students wishing to work in an internship capacity within an artistic/cultural environment may apply for academic credit. The internship is carried out under the joint supervision of a qualified professional (from within or outside the University) and a full-time Studio Arts faculty member. A clearly defined agreement between the Department, the student, and the artist or institution involved will be arrived at before the internship is undertaken. This agreement should state clearly the nature of the students participation and the hours of work expected. Projects receiving approval for the internship credits must demonstrate appreciable learning potential for the student."
ARTT 472 "Professional Internship II" "Prerequisite: ARTT 471, 48 credits in degree requirement and written permission of the Department. Students wishing to work in an internship capacity within an artistic/cultural environment may apply for academic credit. The internship is carried out under the joint supervision of a qualified professional (from within or outside the University) and a full-time Studio Arts faculty member. A clearly defined agreement between the Department, the student, and the artist or institution involved will be arrived at before the internship is undertaken. This agreement should state clearly the nature of the students participation and the hours of work expected. Projects receiving approval for the internship credits must demonstrate appreciable learning potential for the student."
CERA 330 "Ceramics II" "Prerequisite: CERA 230 or permission of the coordinator. An advanced course in technical and historical research in various ceramic processes with an emphasis on glazes and the use of different clay bodies."
CERA 398 "Special Topics in Ceramics" "A workshop/seminar, providing an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of ceramics. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
CERA 399 "Special Topics in Ceramics" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. A workshop/seminar course providing an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects in ceramics."
CERA 430 "Ceramics III" "Prerequisite: CERA 330 or permission of the coordinator. The development of a body of personal work and a refinement of specific problems in clay."
CERA 450 "Independent Study" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Ceramics; CERA 430 previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in ceramics under the supervision of a full-time ceramics faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a six-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
CERA 451 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Ceramics; CERA 430 previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in ceramics under the supervision of a full-time ceramics faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
CERA 452 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Ceramics; CERA 430 previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in ceramics under the supervision of a full-time ceramics faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
CERA 499 "Special Topics in Ceramics" "An advanced studio course which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized aspects of ceramics. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
DRAW 298 "Special Topics in Drawing" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). A studio course which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized aspects of drawing."
DRAW 299 "Special Topics in Drawing" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). A studio course which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized aspects of drawing."
DRAW 300 "Drawing II" "Prerequisite: DRAW 200. This studio course is an intermediate drawing course in which directed projects allow students to explore different approaches to drawing and to begin to develop a more personal visual language based on the skill sets acquired at the 200 level. Historical and contemporary issues in art practice are addressed in this course."
DRAW 310 "Narration, Time, Stories I" "Prerequisite: DRAW 200. This studio course encourages drawing based on personal experience or fictitious content, and the influence of film, books, diaries and illustration. A focus on character, setting and alternate worlds all contribute to a re-emerging interest in narrative forms such as temporality, playback, loops and sequencing."
DRAW 312 "Drawing and Knowledge I" "Prerequisite: DRAW 200. This studio course explores a range of conceptual approaches to drawing using both traditional and experimental methods. Drawing is used as a means to question and make propositions about bodies of knowledge."
DRAW 314 "Life in the Round: Drawing the Figure from Observation I " "Prerequisite: DRAW 200. This studio course focuses on the experience of seeing and depicting the living human body in all its complexity and presence."
DRAW 398 "Special Topics in Drawing" "Prerequisite: DRAW 200. A studio course which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized aspects of drawing. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
DRAW 399 "Special Topics in Drawing" "Prerequisite: DRAW 200; written permission of the Department. A studio course which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized aspects of drawing."
DRAW 400 "Drawing III" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level DRAW course. An advanced drawing class in which students develop a series of self-directed projects in order to create a coherent body of work in drawing and to situate it within contemporary practice. Independent studio practice is supplemented by readings, lectures, seminars, museum/gallery visits and visiting artists."
DRAW 410 "Narration, Time, Stories II" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level DRAW course. This advanced-level studio course encourages drawing based on personal experience or fictitious content, and the influence of film, books, diaries and illustration. A focus on character, setting and alternate worlds all contribute to a re-emerging interest in narrative forms such as temporality, playback, loops and sequencing."
DRAW 412 "Drawing and Knowledge II" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level DRAW course. This advanced-level studio course explores a range of conceptual approaches to drawing using both traditional and experimental methods. Drawing is used as a means to question and make propositions about bodies of knowledge."
DRAW 414 "Life in the Round: Drawing the Figure from Observation II" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level DRAW course. This advanced-level studio course focuses on the experience of seeing and depicting the living human body in all its complexity and presence."
DRAW 418 "Between the Wall and the Viewer" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level Studio Art course. An installation studio course taught by the Painting and Drawing area that encourages students to create work in the context of an expanded field. It includes experimental pictorial, spatial, performative and conceptual responses to site considerations using collage/assemblage, shaped canvases, text/image, objects, paint and unconventional materials."
DRAW 420 "Seminar/Workshop in Drawing" "Prerequisite: PTNG 320 or written permission of the Department. An advanced studio in drawing having its principal emphasis in studio practice, but developing further the theoretical concepts introduced in PTNG 320."
DRAW 450 "Drawing IV" "Prerequisite: DRAW 400. An advanced drawing class in which students develop a series of independent projects that allow them to create a coherent body of work in drawing and to situate it within contemporary practice. Independent studio production is supplemented by readings, lectures, seminars, museum/gallery visits and visiting artists."
DRAW 470 "Independent Study" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level DRAW course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in drawing under the supervision of a full-time drawing faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a six-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
DRAW 471 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level DRAW course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in drawing under the supervision of a full-time drawing faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
DRAW 472 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level DRAW course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in drawing under the supervision of a full-time drawing faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
DRAW 498 "Special Topics in Drawing" "A course for advanced students which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized areas in drawing. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
DRAW 499 "Special Topics in Drawing" "A course for advanced students which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized areas in drawing. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
FBRS 260 "Textile Printing and Dyeing I" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). An introductory course in which students explore the creative potential of printing, painting, dyeing, resist work, and construction with fabric."
FBRS 341 "Intermediate Fibre Structures" "Prerequisite: FBRS 240 or permission of the coordinator. An intermediate-level studio course, which emphasizes the visual and conceptual development in fibre media. Complex woven structures, fibre sculpture, installation practices, and other experimental approaches are explored."
FBRS 361 "Intermediate Textile Printing and Dyeing" "Prerequisite: FBRS 260 or permission of the coordinator. An intermediate-level studio course in textile printing and dyeing with an emphasis on the development of content. Interdisciplinary approaches such as photo processes and sculptural installation are combined with traditional print and dye techniques."
FBRS 371 "Paper: Surface and Object" "Prerequisite: 18 credits in Studio Art courses, or permission of the coordinator. This studio course introduces both Western and Eastern (Japanese) methods of processing raw materials to make pulp and form sheets of paper to be used in expressive art forms. Printing, dyeing, cutting, and bookbinding are used in the consideration of paper as surface and medium."
FBRS 372 "Paper Works" "Prerequisite: 18 credits in Studio Art courses, or permission of the coordinator. This studio course introduces students to making paper as part of an expressive material practice. Sculptural processes such as vacuum relief, casting, and armature building are explored alongside interdisciplinary approaches such as assemblage and the book as object, among others."
FBRS 385 "Issues in Material Practices" "Prerequisite: FBRS 260 or FBRS 240 or permission of the coordinator. This studio course explores contemporary social, material, and cultural issues addressed through fibre and interdisciplinary studio art practices. Assigned readings inform critiques and discussions. Examples of possible title offerings may include Textiles and Identity; The Sustainable Studio; Textiles Without Borders; Transformative Cloth; and Social and Political Practices in Studio Art, among others."
FBRS 386 "Digital Technologies and Material Practices" "Prerequisite: FBRS 240 or FBRS 260 or permission of the coordinator. This studio course combines digital and material approaches within the context of contemporary studio practice. Topics may include software for textile arts, electronic textiles, or other thematic subjects that are combined with electrical and material practices. Other topics may include the use of digital technologies for imaging, pattern development, and textile structures."
FBRS 395 "Extreme Fibres" "Prerequisite: 18 credits in Studio Art courses, or permission of the coordinator. This studio course tests the boundaries of fibres practices to produce innovative and experimental studio work. Students are encouraged to expand individual interests in challenging ways. Topics may include Textile Arts in Public Spaces; Wildly Interdisciplinary Practices; Fibres and Time-Based Media; Radical Papermaking; and Fibres Off-Site, among others."
FBRS 396 "Topics in Fibre Surfaces" "Prerequisite: FBRS 260 and 18 credits in Studio Art courses, or permission of the coordinator. A studio course providing an opportunity for specialized study and practice in fibres surfaces, to explore theoretical, critical, and practical issues of interest to the student towards developing their individual aesthetic in contemporary art."
FBRS 397 "Topics in Fibre Structures" "Prerequisite: FBRS 240 and 18 credits in Studio Art courses, or permission of the coordinator. A studio course providing an opportunity for specialized study and practice in fibres structures, in which to explore contemporary theoretical, critical, and practical issues of interest to the student towards developing a personal aesthetic in art practice."
FBRS 398 "Special Topics in Fibres and Material Practices" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. A workshop/seminar course providing an opportunity for study of specialized aspects of fibres."
FBRS 399 "Special Topics in Fibres and Material Practices" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. A workshop/seminar course providing an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects in fibres."
FBRS 450 "Independent Study" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Fibres and Material Practices; FBRS 480 previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in fibres under the supervision of a full-time fibres faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a six-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
FBRS 451 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; FBRS 480 previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in fibres under the supervision of a full-time fibres faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
FBRS 452 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; FBRS 480 previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in fibres under the supervision of a full-time fibres faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
FBRS 480 "Advanced Fibres" "Prerequisite: Six credits in Fibres and Material Practices at the 300 level, or written permission of the Fibres and Material Practices coordinator. An advanced-level course in which students create a personal body or work, refine technical expertise, and develop a visual and critical language related to fibres and textiles."
FBRS 481 "Professional Internship I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in a Studio Arts program; written permission of the Department. Internships are designed to provide professional experience to students. Students seeking to work in an apprentice capacity with an established artist, or wishing to pursue research in a fibres studio, or research in fibres criticism, museum work, publication, or other related endeavours, may apply for academic credit. The internship is carried out under the joint supervision of a qualified professional (internal or external to the University) and a full-time Fibres and Material Practices faculty member. A clearly defined agreement between the Department, the student, and the artist or institution involved will be arrived at before the Professional Internship is undertaken. Students are required to submit a proposal that clearly defines the learning objectives of the internship and the expected workload (which should equal the hours required for a three-credit course). A Professional Internship request form must be completed and approved by the faculty supervisor and the Department Chair prior to registration permission. Students will supply a report upon completion of the internship to the faculty supervisor and an evaluation from the external supervisor will inform the final grade submitted by the faculty supervisor."
FBRS 482 "Professional Internship II" "Prerequisite: FBRS 481; 48 credits completed in a Studio Arts program; written permission of the Department. Internships are designed to provide professional experience to students. Students seeking to work in an apprentice capacity with an established artist, or wishing to pursue research in a fibres studio, or research in fibres criticism, museum work, publication, or other related endeavours, may apply for academic credit. The internship is carried out under the joint supervision of a qualified professional (internal or external to the University) and a full-time Fibres and Material Practices faculty member. A clearly defined agreement between the Department, the student, and the artist or institution involved will be arrived at before the Professional Internship is undertaken. Students are required to submit a proposal that clearly defines the learning objectives of the internship and the expected workload (which should equal the hours required for a three-credit course). A Professional Internship request form must be completed and approved by the faculty supervisor and the Department Chair prior to registration permission. Students will supply a report upon completion of the internship to the faculty supervisor and an evaluation from the external supervisor will inform the final grade submitted by the faculty supervisor."
IMCA 220 "Introduction to Digital Media and Electronic Arts " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program or written permission of the Department. This studio course is an introduction to the interface between the real world and the computer. Students learn different digitizing techniques as well as the basic communication protocols, compression formats, and numerous standards for text, sound, video, and digital data. They also learn how to create digital artworks using audiovisuals, scanning, printing, and networking."
IMCA 221 "Programming for Artists " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program or written permission of the Department. This studio course is an introduction to basic programming techniques used to create interactive art projects. It is centred on learning the basics of popular object-oriented programming environments such as Max and Jitter, currently used for installation and performance works in interactive music, sound art, interactive video, telematic art, robotics, and more. This course allows students to explore non-screen-based approaches to audiovisual control as well as the more traditional keyboard-and-mouse interface."
IMCA 222 "Electronics for Artists " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program or written permission of the Department. This studio course is an introduction to electronics as applied to artistic projects. It focuses on practical applications of basic electronic principles and techniques and the integration of electronic components and circuits in works of art. From basic electricity to motor control, from flashers and beepers to motion detectors, from analog circuits to digital technologies, it allows students to create artworks involving light, sound, movement, sensors, and interactivity."
IMCA 230 "Performance Art " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program or written permission of the Department. This studio course investigates performance art as a form of social and artistic intervention that crosses between the visual and performing arts. Reflecting the long-standing and historical importance of performance practices in the visual arts, students focus on the production of projects that may reflect such issues as real-time, site-specific, interventionist actions, the interrelationship between installations and performances, and the interdisciplinary interface between performance and other practices found in the performing arts. This course also examines video performance and photography as media for generating performative gestures and as documentation tools."
IMCA 310 "Intermediate Video Production " "Prerequisite: IMCA 210 and VDEO 350 previously or concurrently; or written permission of the Department. A studio/seminar course introducing video technology as a tool for aesthetic investigations. Students work individually and collaboratively to develop proficiency in the medium and evolve their own thematic and formal concerns. Non-linear editing systems such as Avid and Final Cut Pro are introduced. Discussions, facilitated by video screenings, workshops, and readings, focus on class projects, student work, and a discussion of related art issues. In addition, this course offers students an opportunity to investigate other cultural practices that inform and interrogate contemporary video art."
IMCA 321 "Electronic Arts Workshop " "Prerequisite: 24 credits completed in degree program within the Department of Studio Arts; or written permission of the Department. This studio course focuses on interactive technologies in relation to contemporary art practices (for example, installation, performance, kinetic sculpture, and sound art). Students may pursue individual or team work while developing their artistic project. This course is centred on programming environments (such as MaxMSP and Jitter) and focuses on interactivity through the use of various sensors and interfaces, and on popular and easy-to-learn microcontrollers."
IMCA 322 "Robotics for Artists " "Prerequisite: 24 credits completed in a degree program within the Department of Studio Arts; or written permission of the Department. This studio course focuses on robotic technologies applied to the arts and electronics, mechanics and programming integration. The emphasis is on an interdisciplinary and cybernetic approach to audiovisual media control and expression including movement, sound, lighting, and video using computers and electronics. In order to develop robotic art projects, students create interactive systems and machine behaviours through the use of various sensors and actuators."
IMCA 331 "Intermedia and Interventionist Performance Practices " "Prerequisite: 24 credits completed within the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program; or written permission of the Department. An intermediate-level studio class with a seminar component focusing on the development of site-specific projects based on video, performance and electronic arts. The seminar component of the course includes a series of readings and the presentation of an extensive range of work by artists."
IMCA 332 "Intermedia, Performance Practices and Performative Video " "Prerequisite: 24 credits completed within the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program; or written permission of the Department. An intermediate-level studio class with a seminar component focusing on the development of intermedia projects based on video, 3D video, sound, performance and electronic arts. The seminar component of the course includes a series of readings and the presentation of an extensive range of work by artists"
IMCA 398 "Special Topics in Intermedia/Cyberarts " "Prerequisite: Second-year standing* in the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program or written permission of the Department. A studio course providing an opportunity for study and practice of specialized aspects of intermedia and cyberarts."
IMCA 399 "Special Topics in Intermedia/Cyberarts " "Prerequisite: Second-year standing* in the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program or written permission of the Department. A studio course providing and opportunity for study and practice of specialized aspects of intermedia and cyberarts."
IMCA 400 "Advanced Practices in Video, Performance and Electronic Arts " "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed within the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program; or written permission of the Department. An advanced studio class in which students create a personal body of work, refine technical expertise, and develop a visual and critical language related to video, performance, and electronic arts. Topics are presented and discussed in seminar fashion. A group exhibition at the end of the year is required."
IMCA 470 "Independent Study in Intermedia/Cyberarts " "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level IMCA course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in intermedia/cyberarts under the supervision of a full-time intermedia/cyberarts faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a six-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
IMCA 471 "Independent Study in Intermedia/Cyberarts I " "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level IMCA course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in intermedia/cyberarts under the supervision of a full-time intermedia/cyberarts faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
IMCA 472 "Independent Study in Intermedia/Cyberarts II " "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level IMCA course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in intermedia/cyberarts under the supervision of a full-time intermedia/cyberarts faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
IMCA 480 "Professional Internship in Intermedia/Cyberarts " "Prerequisite: Third-year standing* and written permission of the Department. Under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time faculty member, the student is employed within industry or by a professional organization or other relevant institution. A clearly defined agreement between the Department, the student, and the artist/professional or institution involved is established before the internship is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students participation and the hours of work expected. Projects receiving approval for the internship credits must demonstrate appreciable learning potential for the student."
IMCA 481 "Professional Internship in Intermedia/Cyberarts I " "Prerequisite: Third-year standing* and written permission of the Department. Under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time faculty member, the student is employed within industry or by a professional organization or other relevant institution. A clearly defined agreement between the Department, the student, and the artist/professional or institution involved is established before the internship is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students participation and the hours of work expected. Projects receiving approval for the internship credits must demonstrate appreciable learning potential for the student."
IMCA 482 "Professional Internship in Intermedia/Cyberarts II " "Prerequisite: Third-year standing* and written permission of the Department. Under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time faculty member, the student is employed within industry or by a professional organization or other relevant institution. A clearly defined agreement between the Department, the student, and the artist/professional or institution involved is established before the internship is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students participation and the hours of work expected. Projects receiving approval for the internship credits must demonstrate appreciable learning potential for the student."
IMCA 498 "Special Topics in Intermedia/Cyberarts " "Prerequisite: Third-year standing* in the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program or written permission of the Department. A studio course providing an opportunity for study and practice of specialized aspects of intermedia and cyberarts."
IMCA 499 "Special Topics in Intermedia/Cyberarts " "Prerequisite: Third-year standing* in the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program or written permission of the Department. A studio course providing an opportunity for study and practice of specialized aspects of intermedia and cyberarts."
PTNG 298 "Special Topics in Painting" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). A studio course which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized aspects of painting."
PTNG 299 "Special Topics in Painting" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). A studio course which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized aspects of painting."
PTNG 300 "Painting II" "Prerequisite: PTNG 200. This studio course is an intermediate painting class in which directed projects allow students to explore a variety of approaches to the medium and to begin to develop a more personal visual language based on the skill sets acquired at the 200 level. Historical and contemporary issues in art practice are addressed in this course."
PTNG 310 "Painting and Popular Culture I" "Prerequisite: PTNG 200. A studio course designed to focus on the relationship between painting and popular culture. The course explores the impact of photography, cinema, advertising, television, comic books, pulp fiction, popular music, and digital media on the conventions of painting."
PTNG 312 "Body, Representation and Information I" "Prerequisite: PTNG 200. This studio course addresses contemporary art issues in painting, exploring body information in relation to questions of power, race, gender, and sexuality."
PTNG 314 "Life in the Round: Painting the Figure from Observation I" "Prerequisite: PTNG 200. This studio course focuses on the experience of seeing and depicting the living human body in all its complexity and presence."
PTNG 316 "Abstract Painting I" "Prerequisite: PTNG 200. A studio course designed to focus on the historical and contemporary practice of abstraction."
PTNG 320 "Studio/Seminar in Painting and Drawing" "Prerequisite: DRAW 200; PTNG 200; or written permission of the Department. A combination studio/seminar in which advanced ideas in painting and drawing are addressed. Special topics of approximately one month duration are presented by guest artists from within and outside the Faculty."
PTNG 398 "Special Topics in Painting" "Prerequisite: PTNG 200. A studio course which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized aspects of painting. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
PTNG 399 "Special Topics in Painting" "Prerequisite: PTNG 200; written permission of the Department. A studio course which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized aspects of painting."
PTNG 400 "Painting III" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level PTNG course. An advanced painting class in which students develop a series of independent projects that allow them to create a coherent body of work in painting and to situate it within contemporary practice. Independent studio production may be supplemented by readings, lectures, seminars, museum/gallery visits, and visiting artists."
PTNG 410 "Painting and Popular Culture II" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level PTNG course. An advanced-level studio course designed to focus on the relationship between painting and popular culture. This course explores the impact of photography, cinema, advertising, television, comic books, pulp fiction, popular music, and digital media on the conventions of painting."
PTNG 412 "Body, Representation and Information II" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level PTNG course. This advanced-level studio course addresses contemporary art issues and their representation in painting, exploring body information in relation to questions of power, race, gender, and sexuality."
PTNG 414 "Life in the Round: Painting the Figure from Observation II" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level PTNG course. This advanced-level studio course focuses on the experience of seeing and depicting the living human body in all its complexity and presence."
PTNG 416 "Abstract Painting II" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level PTNG course. An advanced-level studio class designed to focus on the historical and contemporary practice of abstraction."
PTNG 418 "Between the Wall and the Viewer " "Prerequisite: Any 300-level Studio Art course. An installation studio course taught by faculty in the Painting and Drawing area that encourages students to create work in the context of an expanded field. It includes experimental pictorial, spatial, performative, and conceptual responses to site considerations using collage/assemblage, shaped canvases, text/image, objects, paint, and unconventional materials."
PTNG 420 "Seminar/Workshop in Painting" "Prerequisite: PTNG 320 or written permission of the Department. An advanced studio in painting having its principal emphasis in studio practice, but developing further the theoretical concepts introduced in PTNG 320."
PTNG 430 "Women and Painting" "Prerequisite: PTNG 200 or written permission of the Department. A studio/seminar course in which students are encouraged to explore their world in painting and consider their practice from the point of view of womens experience, individually and collectively."
PTNG 440 "Collage" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. An exploration of collage as a means of expression evolving from the historical and artistic traditions of painting and drawing."
PTNG 450 "Painting IV" "Prerequisite: PTNG 400. An advanced painting class in which students develop a series of independent projects that allow them to create a coherent body of work in painting and to situate it within contemporary practice. Independent studio production may be supplemented by readings, lectures, seminars, museum/gallery visits, and visiting artists."
PTNG 460 "Materials and Methods of the Artist" "Prerequisite: DRAW 300; PTNG 300 or written permission of the Department. Through a series of special projects in drawing and painting, this course familiarizes the student with historical materials and techniques, and with other aspects of the artists concerns."
PTNG 470 "Independent Study" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level PTNG course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in painting under the supervision of a full-time painting faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a six-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
PTNG 471 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level PTNG course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in painting under the supervision of a full-time painting faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
PTNG 472 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level PTNG course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in painting under the supervision of a full-time painting faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
PTNG 498 "Special Topics in Painting" "A course for advanced students which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized areas in painting. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
PTNG 499 "Special Topics in Painting" "A course for advanced students which provides an opportunity for the study of more specialized areas in painting. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
PHOT 210 "Foundations in Photographic Vision Theory and Practice I " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major or Minor in Photography, or 24 credits in a specialization/major in the Faculty of Fine Arts. In this course, students investigate and examine the numerous aspects of photographys complex history, aesthetics, and processes, as well as different camera and darkroom techniques specific to colour photography. Students learn how to control the camera, expose film properly (transparency and negative), develop good printing skills in colour, and produce a coherent body of work. They should become aware of how colour contributes to the structure and meaning of photographs. Other topics include the history of colour photography and aesthetic and conceptual issues in the work of contemporary photographers. Students are expected to work on technical exercises and produce a final portfolio which is content-driven, demonstrates technical proficiency, and expresses the individuals artistic interest and vision."
PHOT 211 "Black-and-White Photography I" "Prerequisite: PHOT 210 and ARTH 267 previously or concurrently; enrolment in the Major or Minor in Photography; or written permission of the program director. A studio course introducing the use of black and white as photographic process, parallel to colour production and practice taught in PHOT 210. Students are taught basic technical skills, film processing, darkroom techniques and printing. Students are also introduced to black-and-white photographic tradition and aesthetics. Students must produce a final portfolio that is content-driven, demonstrates technical proficiency, and expresses personal artistic interests and vision."
PHOT 221 "Colour Photography I" "Prerequisite: PHOT 200 and ARTH 267 previously or concurrently; enrolment in the Major or Minor in Photography; or written permission of the program director. In this course, students become aware of how colour contributes to the structure and meaning of photographs. Topics include the history of colour and aesthetic and conceptual issues in the work of contemporary photographers. Students are expected to achieve a basic level of expertise with the techniques of colour and to make high-quality prints. The goal in this course is for each student to produce a final portfolio which demonstrates technical proficiency, is content-driven, and expresses the individuals personal artistic interests and vision."
PHOT 300 "Photographic Vision: Theory and Practice II" "Prerequisite: PHOT 210 and ARTH 267 and enrolment in the Major or Minor in Photography; or written permission of the program director. The purpose of this studio course is to provide a framework within which students pursue their photographic practice at an intermediate level. Students are encouraged to explore concepts and technical components in a long-term project. They develop a photographic language which is specific to their own practice and learn from the work of other contemporary artists. The final portfolio is content-driven and expresses personal artistic vision."
PHOT 301 "Black-and-White II Fine Art Printing " "Prerequisite: PHOT 210, 211, 331; enrolment in the Major or Minor in Photography; or written permission of the program director. A continuation of PHOT 211, this studio course explores further techniques in fine art black-and-white printing. Students are introduced to advanced darkroom processes, mural printing, and quad tone digital printing. Students must produce a final portfolio that is content-driven, demonstrates technical proficiency, and expresses personal artistic interests and vision."
PHOT 311 "Large Format Photography I" "Prerequisite: PHOT 210, 211; ARTH 267; enrolment in the Major or Minor in Photography; or written permission of the program director. A studio course introducing large format photography, its techniques and application. Demonstrations cover the basics of view camera operation, light metering, sheet film exposure, development, and advanced printing. Assignments based on traditional genres encourage ease with all aspects of large format use and their personal applications."
PHOT 312 "Large Format Photography II" "Prerequisite: PHOT 210, 211, 311; ARTH 267; enrolment in the Major or Minor in Photography; or written permission of the Department. A studio course directed towards the development of an individual approach to view camera photography. Various uses of advanced techniques are also discussed. Emphasis is put on the development of a coherent portfolio of prints expressing personal concerns."
PHOT 322 "Colour Photography II" "Prerequisite: PHOT 210; PHOT 221 or 321; ARTH 267; and enrolment in the Major or Minor in Photography, or written permission of the program director. A continuation of PHOT 221, this course explores further techniques in colour photography and advanced colour printing. Aesthetic issues such as changing attitudes towards the colour medium and its role in documentary work are discussed. A final portfolio reflects the students personal approach to colour photography."
PHOT 331 "Digital Photography I" "Prerequisite: PHOT 210; PHOT 221 previously or concurrently; and enrolment in the Major in Photography, or written permission of the program director. An introductory studio course investigating the technical and creative aspects of digital photography. This course provides students with an understanding of the digital image and a practical application of the tools within their personal approach to photography. Students explore the production of digital photographs, emphasizing the manipulation of images with software and the preparation for different formats. Issues related to the use of digital imagery within the larger context of photography are explored."
PHOT 332 "Digital Photography II" "Prerequisite: PHOT 331 and enrolment in the Major or Minor in Photography, or written permission of the Department. This advanced course expands on the basic control skills and creative aspects of digital technology by implementing personal approaches to the use of technology. Emphasis is on the creative development and advanced use of technology for the production of a portfolio."
PHOT 398 "Special Topics in Photography" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. An opportunity for the study of limited and more specialized aspects of photography."
PHOT 399 "Special Topics in Photography" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. An opportunity for the study of limited and more specialized aspects of photography."
PHOT 400 "Advanced Workshop in Photography" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Photography including PHOT 300, ARTH 359, or written permission of the program director. A studio course in which students pursue one or more extended photographic projects in black and white and/or digital. Topics related to contemporary photography are presented in a seminar fashion."
PHOT 470 "Professional Internship" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Photography and written permission of the Department. A student wishing to work in an apprentice capacity with an established photographic artist, or wishing to pursue research in photographic criticism, museum work, publication, or other related endeavours may apply for academic credit. The internship will be carried out under the joint supervision of a qualified professional (from within or without the University) and a full-time Photography faculty member. A clearly defined agreement between the Department, the student, and the artist or institution involved will be arrived at before the internship is undertaken. This agreement should state clearly the nature of the students participation and the hours of work expected. Projects receiving approval for the internship credits must demonstrate appreciable learning potential for the student."
PHOT 471 "Professional Internship I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Photography and written permission of the Department. A student wishing to work in an apprentice capacity with an established photographic artist, or wishing to pursue research in photographic criticism, museum work, publication, or other related endeavours may apply for academic credit. The internship will be carried out under the joint supervision of a qualified professional (from within or without the University) and a full-time Photography faculty member. A clearly defined agreement between the Department, the student, and the artist or institution involved will be arrived at before the internship is undertaken. This agreement should state clearly the nature of the students participation and the hours of work expected. Projects receiving approval for the internship credits must demonstrate appreciable learning potential for the student."
PHOT 472 "Professional Internship II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Photography and written permission of the Department. Students who wish additional internships in a professional milieu may take this course."
PHOT 480 "Independent Study" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level PHOT course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in photography under the supervision of a full-time photography faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a six-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
PHOT 481 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level PHOT course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in photography under the supervision of a full-time photography faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
PHOT 482 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level PHOT course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in photography under the supervision of a full-time photography faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
PHOT 498 "Special Topics in Photography" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. A course for advanced students which provides an opportunity for the study of limited and more specialized aspects of photography."
PHOT 499 "Special Topics in Photography" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. A course for advanced students which provides an opportunity for the study of limited and more specialized aspects of photography."
PRIN 221 "Lithography I" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). An introductory studio course in lithographic techniques with an emphasis on creative imagery. This course covers drawing and photo-based processes on stone and plate. Assignments, lectures, and critiques focus on theoretical, historical, and aesthetic issues in contemporary print media."
PRIN 231 "Screen Printing I" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). An introductory studio course in the basic techniques of screen printing with an emphasis on creative imagery. This course covers stencil techniques using digital and hand-drawn processes. Assignments, lectures, and critiques focus on theoretical, historical, and aesthetic issues in contemporary print media."
PRIN 241 "Processes in Digital Print Media I" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). An introductory studio course in the basic concepts of contemporary digital imaging and print applications. This course covers file creation and layers for multi-plate hand-printing. The creation of multiples through traditional, non-traditional, and other historical technologies is also explored. Lectures and critiques focus on theoretical, critical, and aesthetic issues in contemporary digital print media."
PRIN 271 "Contemporary Print Processes I" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This introductory studio course addresses special topics in print processes and new technologies. Students create a portfolio of artwork that demonstrates their research."
PRIN 291 "Contemporary Relief and Woodcut I" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). An introductory studio course in the basic techniques of woodcut and relief printing with an emphasis on creative imagery. This course covers the basic principles of cutting and hand-printing on wood, linoleum, and other materials. Assignments, lectures, and critiques focus on theoretical, historical, and aesthetic issues in contemporary print media."
PRIN 311 "Intaglio II" "Prerequisite: PRIN 211; six credits in Print Media; second-year standing* in a Fine Arts program; or written permission of the program director. An intermediate intaglio studio course with an emphasis on individual creative and theoretical development through experimentation and innovation. This course explores multi-plate image making, including drawing and photographic applications in print, advanced proofing, and printing processes. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and critical analysis in the creation of personal imagery. Students are required to develop a coherent portfolio that demonstrates their engagement in contemporary print practice."
PRIN 321 "Lithography II" "Prerequisite: PRIN 221; six credits in Print Media; second-year standing* in a Fine Arts program; or written permission of the program director. An intermediate lithography studio course with emphasis on individual creative and theoretical development through experimentation and innovation. This course explores hand-drawn, digital, and photographic processes through stone and plate lithography with an emphasis on colour printing. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and crtitical analysis in the creation of personal imagery. Students are required to develop a coherent portfolio that demonstrates their engagement in contemporary print theory and practice."
PRIN 331 "Screen Printing II" "Prerequisite: PRIN 231; six credits in Print Media; second-year standing* in a Fine Arts program; or written permission of the program director. An intermediate screen-printing studio course with an emphasis on individual creative and theoretical development through experimentation and innovation. This course provides the opportunity for continued research in drawing, photographic and digital applications, colour printing, alternative printing surfaces, and the combination of print processes. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and critical analysis in the creation of personal imagery. Students are required to develop a coherent portolio that demonstrates their engagement in contemporary print theory and practice."
PRIN 341 "Processes in Digital Print Media II " "Prerequisite: PRIN 241; six credits in Print Media; second-year standing* in a Fine Arts program; or written permission of the program director. An intermediate studio course with an emphasis on concepts of digital imaging, print applications, file creation, and layers for multi-plate hand-printing and file export to various digital print formats. Lectures and critiques focus on theoretical, critical, and aesthetic issues in contemporary digital print media. Students are required to develop a coherent portfolio that demonstrates their involvement in contemporary print theory and practice."
PRIN 365 "The Artists Book as Object" "Prerequisite: Nine credits in Print Media; second-year standing* in a Fine Arts program; or written permission of the program director. An intermediate studio course with an emphasis on individual creative and theoretical development through experimentation and innovation. This course explores book structures, bindings, and print processes for the creation of artist books as objects. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and critical analysis in the creation of personal imagery."
PRIN 366 "Aspects of the Artist Book" "Prerequisite: Nine credits from Print Media; second-year standing* in a Fine Arts program; or written permission of the program director. An intermediate studio course with an emphasis on creative and theoretical development through experimentation and innovation. Through lectures, demonstrations, and assignments on the technical and conceptual considerations in creating traditional and non-traditional book forms, this course explores book arts from the vantage point of print media examining the broad definition of the terms artist book or book art. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and critical analysis in the creation of personal imagery. This course has a compulsory computer lab component."
PRIN 371 "Contemporary Print Processes II" "Prerequisite: Nine credits in Print Media; second-year standing* in a Fine Arts program; or written permission of the program director. This intermediate studio course addresses topics in print processes and technologies. Students create a portfolio of artwork that demonstrates their research."
PRIN 381 "Aspects of Print Media" "Prerequisite: Nine credits in Print Media; second-year standing* in a Fine Arts program; or written permission of the program director. An intermediate studio course that focuses on theoretical issues and practices in contemporary print media. Students create a body of artwork that demonstrates critical thinking and research on the featured topic."
PRIN 391 "Contemporary Relief and Woodcut II" "Prerequisite: PRIN 291; six credits in Print Media; second-year standing* in a Fine Arts program; or written permission of the program director. An intermediate studio course in the techniques of woodcut and relief printing with an emphasis on creation. This course explores hand-drawn, digital and related processes through woodcut and relief. Colour and advanced printing are covered. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and critical analysis in the creation of personal imagery. Students are required to develop a coherent portfolio that demonstrates their involvement in contemporary print theory and practice."
PRIN 398 "Special Topics in Print Media" "Prerequisite: Nine credits in Print Media; second-year standing* in a Fine Arts program; or written permission of the program director. An intermediate studio course that examines ideas and practices in contemporary print media, students produce printed images that reflect their research and critical thinking on the specific topic."
PRIN 399 "Special Topics in Print Media" "Prerequisite: Nine credits in Print Media; second-year standing* in a Fine Arts program; or written permission of the program director. An intermediate studio course that examines ideas and practices in contemporary print media, students produce printed images that reflect their research and critical thinking on the specific topic."
PRIN 411 "Intaglio III" "Prerequisite: PRIN 311; nine credits in Print Media; or written permission of the program director. An advanced intaglio studio course with an emphasis on individual creative and theoretical development through experimentation. This course explores digital and photo-generated imagery, multiple-plate colour processes, alternative print surfaces, combined print techniques, and new technologies. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and critical analysis in the creation of personal imagery. Students are required to develop a coherent portfolio that demonstrates their engagement in contemporary print theory and practice."
PRIN 421 "Lithography III" "Prerequisite: PRIN 321; nine credits in Print Media, or written permission of the program director. An advanced lithography studio course with an emphasis on individual creative and theoretical development through experimentation and innovation. This course explores advanced techniques in stone and plate lithography, hand-drawn, photographic, and digitally generated imagery. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and critical analysis in the creation of personal imagery. Students are required to develop a coherent portfolio that demonstrates their engagement in contemporary print theory and practice."
PRIN 431 "Screen Printing III" "Prerequisite: PRIN 331; nine credits in Print Media, or written permission of the program director. An advanced screen-printing studio course with an emphasis on individual creative and theoretical development through experimentation and innovation. This course investigates hand-drawn, photographic and digital print applications, and combined techniques. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and critical analysis in the creation of personal imagery. Students are required to develop a coherent portfolio that demonstrates their engagement in contemporary print theory and practice."
PRIN 441 "Advanced Processes in Digital Print Media III" "Prerequisite: PRIN 341; nine credits in Print Media; or written permission of the program director. An advanced digital studio course with an emphasis on individual creative and theoretical development through experimentation and innovation. In this course, students develop an independent interdisciplinary research project that investigates the integration of digital and traditional reproduction technologies. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and critical analysis in the creation of personal imagery. Students are required to develop a coherent portfolio that demonstrates their engagement in contemporary print theory and practice."
PRIN 451 "Advanced Projects in Print Media I" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level Print Media course or written permission of the program director. An advanced studio course where students propose and complete print projects in consultation with the instructor. Students design projects according to their interests and established technical proficiency. The course emphasizes individual practice within the context of informed discussion, group and individual critiques, gallery and museum visits, and may include an exhibition."
PRIN 452 "Advanced Projects in Print Media II" "Prerequisite: PRIN 451 or written permission of the program director. An advanced studio course where students propose and complete print projects in consultation with the instructor. Students design projects according to their interests and established technical proficiency. The course emphasizes individual practice within the context of informed discussion, group and individual critiques, gallery and museum visits, and may include an exhibition. This course is a continuation of PRIN 451."
PRIN 470 "Independent Study in Print Media" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level PRIN course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in print media under the supervision of a full-time print faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a six-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
PRIN 471 "Independent Study in Print Media I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level PRIN course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in print media under the supervision of a full-time print faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
PRIN 472 "Independent Study in Print Media II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; a 400-level PRIN course previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in print media under the supervision of a full-time print faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
PRIN 481 "Professional Internship" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. Internships are for students who wish to obtain practical experience by working as an apprentice in a professional environment, or who would like to pursue research in the curating of prints, print criticism, or other related experience in print media, and receive academic credit for the activity. Approval of the project will be based on the demonstrable learning potential of the activity. Students are required to submit an internship proposal that clearly defines the objective of the activity, appropriate workload (equivalent to the hours required for a three-credit course), nature of participation, and supervisory schedules. The internship will be jointly supervised by a faculty member and a qualified professional. It is the students responsibility to obtain approval for the proposal from a program advisor, including any required contractual agreements, before the start of the internship."
PRIN 498 "Special Topics in Print Media" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level Print Media course or written permission of the program director. An advanced studio course with an emphasis on individual creative and theoretical development through experimentation and innovation. In this course, students produce printed images that reflect their research and critical thinking on the specific topic. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and critical analysis in the creation of personal imagery. Students are required to develop a coherent portfolio that demonstrates their engagement in contemporary print theory and practice."
PRIN 499 "Special Topics in Print Media" "Prerequisite: Any 300-level Print Media course or written permission of the program director. An advanced studio course with an emphasis on individual creative and theoretical development through experimentation and innovation. In this course, students produce printed images that reflect their research and critical thinking on the specific topic. Group and individual critiques and discussions emphasize problem solving and critical analysis in the creation of personal imagery. Students are required to develop a coherent portfolio that demonstrates their engagement in contemporary print theory and practice."
SCUL 251 "Sculpture/Mechanics" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program or written permission of the Department. This studio course introduces students to animating sculpture through a variety of techniques such as moving joints, gear, chain, and pulley systems, and motion converters, leading to more complex assemblies in animating static form. Students develop basic skills in reading and drawing blueprints, as well as in measuring and marking techniques for application in metal, wood, mould-making, and other applicable materials."
SCUL 310 "Sculpture and Spatial Practices " "Prerequisite: SCUL 210 (200) or permission of the Department. This course builds and expands on the potential for expression inherent in contemporary sculpture. Students are encouraged to develop an individual form of study through the various spatial considerations of sculptural intervention, installation, action, and object. Participants build on their awareness of contemporary issues and hone their identities as artists."
SCUL 396 "Digital Sculpture " "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This studio course introduces 3D software for sculptors, covering modelling, drafting, and rendering for both real and virtual output, using advanced manual and automated processes."
SCUL 398 "Special Topics in Sculpture" "Prerequisite: Third-year standing*; written permission of the Department. A workshop/ seminar course providing an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of sculpture."
SCUL 399 "Special Topics in Sculpture" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. A workshop/seminar course providing an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects in sculpture."
SCUL 410 "Sculpture and Interventionist Practices" "Prerequisite: SCUL 310 (300) or permission of the Department. This is an advanced investigation of concepts through research in sculpture oriented to the development of a personal body of work. Installation, intervention, and public space form the background for presenting sculptural ideas. Diversity of contemporary sculptural practice and critical discourse is encouraged to promote professional autonomy in students studio work and ideas."
SCUL 450 "Independent Study" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; SCUL 410 (400) previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in sculpture under the supervision of a full-time sculpture faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a six-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
SCUL 451 "Independent Study I " "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; SCUL 410 (400) previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in sculpture under the supervision of a full-time sculpture faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
SCUL 452 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in degree program; SCUL 410 (400) previously or concurrently; and written permission of the Department. This course provides a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced studies in sculpture under the supervision of a full-time sculpture faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the instructor involved is required before the independent study is undertaken. This agreement should clearly state the nature of the students research, and the scope of the project and schedule of work should be equivalent to the workload of a three-credit course. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required before requesting permission."
SCUL 490 "Advanced Studio Practice" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Sculpture, in Ceramics, or in Fibres and Material Practices; or written permission of the Department. A studio course providing an opportunity for the advanced student to work in an intimate context within a studio setting, structured around current topics of theoretical and practical importance."
BIOL 200 "Fundamentals of Human Biology" "A series of lectures, demonstrations, and seminars to provide non-biologists with a general survey of the fundamental principles of life, with special emphasis on the structures and functions of human beings. Lectures only."
BIOL 201 "Introductory Biology" "Fundamentals of plant and animal biology: basic physics and chemistry of life; cell and tissue structures and functions; anatomy and physiology of human systems; survey of plant and animal taxonomy, ecology, heredity, and evolution. Lectures and laboratory."
BIOL 202 "General Biology" "This course presents the fundamentals of biology including the basic physics and chemistry of life, the structure and functions of cell and tissues, and aspects of anatomy, physiology, taxonomy, heredity and evolution, with examples ranging from micro-organisms to humans. Lectures only."
BIOL 203 "Fundamental Nutrition" "This course deals with food composition (carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, vitamins, and minerals), its absorption and utilization, energy balance, special diets, and food technology. Lectures only."
BIOL 205 "(also listed as LOYC 205)" "            Introduction to Sustainability "
BIOL 206 "Elementary Genetics" "A survey of classical and contemporary developments in the study of heredity, with particular attention to human examples. This course is open to the general student body. Lectures only."
BIOL 225 "Form and Function of Organisms" "Prerequisite: Cegep Biology 301 or 101-NYA or BIOL 201. An introduction to plant and animal form and function is presented. This course provides an overview of basic physiological and morphological aspects of plants and animals that allow survival and reproduction. Topics in animal biology include animal architecture, internal fluids, homeostasis, digestion and nutrition, nervous and chemical coordination; topics in plant biology include plant organization, photosynthesis, respiration, water relations, and growth regulation. Reproduction and development of both plants and animals are introduced. Lectures only."
BIOL 226 "Biodiversity and Ecology" "Prerequisite: Cegep Biology 301 or 101-NYA or BIOL 201. This course introduces the evolution, biodiversity, and ecology of organisms. The origin and diversity of life, from prokaryotes, through simple eukaryotes to multi-cellular organisms are introduced. Natural selection, speciation, and phylogeny, stressing evolutionary relationships in conjunction with changing conditions on earth, are presented. The course introduces major concepts in ecology: the physical and chemical environment, population structure, life histories, species interactions, communities, and ecosystems. Lectures only."
BIOL 227 "Laboratory Studies in Biodiversity" "Prerequisite: BIOL 225; BIOL 226 previously or concurrently. This course reviews the diversity of organisms and introduces methods used in their study. The tutorials focus on key evolutionary mechanisms associated with organism diversity, model organisms that illustrate it and phylogenies that integrate diversity. The laboratory exercises are in basic protocols and may include bacterial classification; the structural diversity of protists; reproductive diversity among fungi; invertebrate internal morphology and behaviour; arthropod and mollusk classification; exercises in vertebrate homology; and studies on plant structure, development and physiology. Laboratory and tutorial."
BIOL 261 "Molecular and General Genetics" "Prerequisite: Cegep Biology 301 or 101-NYA or BIOL 201; 202 NYA or CHEM 205; 202-NYB or CHEM 206. Basic genetic principles, including mechanisms of meiosis and mitosis, Mendelian genetics, recombination, gene mapping, and chromosome rearrangements; an introduction to molecular genetics, including nucleic acid structure and biosynthesis transcription and translation; the course also includes an introduction to recombinant DNA technology and to concepts of population genetics. Lectures and tutorials."
BIOL 266 "Cell Biology" "Prerequisite: Cegep Biology 301 or 101-NYA or BIOL 201; 202-NYA or CHEM 205; 202-NYB or CHEM 206. Structure and functions of the cell and its organelles: cytoskeleton, chromosomes, cell cycle and cell division, organelle biogenesis, molecular motors, trafficking of proteins and membranes, signal transduction, trans-membrane transport, cancer, apoptosis. Lectures only."
BIOL 298 "Selected Topics in Biology" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
BIOL 321 "Evolution" "Prerequisite: BIOL 225, 226. Through readings, discussions, and lectures, students explore the evidence for evolution, as well as current theories for the mechanisms that cause evolutionary change. Topics covered include principles of inheritance and variation, adaptation through natural selection, random processes in evolution, and the role of molecular and macroevolutionary processes in shaping current patterns of biodiversity. Lectures and tutorials."
BIOL 322 "Biostatistics" "Prerequisite: Nine BIOL credits in a Biology major, honours, or specialization program or completion of Stage I of the Geography honours or specialization programs in Environmental Science or permission of the Department. This course examines statistical methods for the biological sciences; experimental design; data description; binomial, Poisson and Normal distributions; statistical inference; hypothesis testing; chi-square; one and two sample tests of the mean; analysis of variance including 2-way and nested ANOVAs; correlation; regression; and analogous non-parametric techniques. Lectures and laboratory."
BIOL 330 "Vertebrate Biology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 225, 226. This course explores how the anatomy, physiology, life history, ecology and behaviour of vertebrates interact to generate animals that function effectively in their environments, and how different vertebrate groups have evolved over the past few hundred million years. Major vertebrate groups discussed are cartilaginous fishes, bony fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals. Other special topics on vertebrate biology considered include the role of ecology in vertebrate speciation, vertebrate adaptations to extreme environments, seasonal migrations, human evolution, as well as conservation issues facing different vertebrate groups worldwide."
BIOL 337 "Invertebrate Biology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 225, 226, 227. This course surveys the diversity of invertebrates and their functional systems, emphasizing the basic themes that define each phylum and those that are common to all animals. The course focuses on evolution, life histories, physiology, and anatomy of the major phyla and the diversity of the minor phyla. Lectures and laboratory."
BIOL 340 "Plant Biology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 225, 226. This course surveys the biology of the plant kingdom. Topics include the evolution of the major groups and a comparative analysis of the form (anatomy), function (physiology), and life history of plants. Examples from the local flora are emphasized. Lectures and laboratory."
BIOL 350 "The Ecology of Individuals" "Prerequisite: BIOL 225, 226. This course is designed to introduce students to the diversity of adaptations possessed by individuals which enables them to interact successfully with the abiotic and biotic environment. Major topics include responses to temperature, water, gas exchange, light, and other species. In addition, sensory ecology and escape in time and space are covered. Physiological adaptations are emphasized. Lectures only."
BIOL 351 "Basic Population Ecology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 226. This course introduces the processes which determine the distribution and abundance of individuals in populations. Population growth, density-dependent and density-independent population regulation, survivorship, life history parameters, the population dynamics of competition, predation and parasitism, and the roles of predation and competition in affecting community structure are discussed. Lectures and tutorials."
BIOL 353 "Communities and Ecosystems" "Prerequisite: BIOL 225, 226. This course presents an introduction to biological communities, the processes that maintain them and their emergent properties. Topics include the interactions between abiotic and biotic factors in determining community composition, the concepts of niche and habitat, succession theory, community diversity and stability, energy flow and nutrient cycling. Examples emphasize both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, and the major global biomes. Lectures only."
BIOL 354 "Behavioural Ecology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 226. Behavioural ecology is the study of behavioural adaptation. The topics include foraging, anti-predator, fighting, mating, reproductive and social behaviour. Students will be introduced to optimality and game theories. Lectures and tutorials."
BIOL 364 "Cell Physiology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 266; CHEM 271. This course covers general and specialized processes at the molecular and cellular level in eukaryotes and prokaryotes; protein folding and degradation, signalling by nerves, bioenergetics (respiration and photosynthesis), cell motility, muscle contraction, eukaryotic cilia and flagella, sensory perception, and fundamental immunology. Lectures only."
BIOL 366 "Mechanisms of Development" "Prerequisite: BIOL 261, 266. This course explores the mechanisms of cellular interactions and genetic control that govern cell differentiation and development in a range of organisms, from simple model systems to mammals. Specific questions address how cell movement and cell recognition take place, how the genome is restricted in differentiation, how cytoplasmic signals influence differentiation, how gradients affect development, how genes control segmentation, and how growth factors and hormones influence development. The role of genetic engineering in the understanding of developmental processes is discussed. The course is based on gaining an understanding of the basic concepts, mechanisms, and experimental tools used in developmental research. Lectures only."
BIOL 367 "Molecular Biology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 261; CHEM 271. This course examines DNA structure, recombinant DNA methodologies, gene structure, transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation, RNA processing events, translation, chromatin modification, chromatin remodelling and DNA replication. The experimental evidence supporting these concepts is also discussed. Lectures and tutorials."
BIOL 368 "Genetics and Cell Biology Laboratory" "Prerequisite: BIOL 261, 266; CHEM 212 or 217 or BIOL 227. This course introduces students to the basic laboratory techniques of cell biology, microbiology, bacterial genetics, and molecular biology. Experiments include cell membrane functions in red blood cells, bacterial identification, mutagenesis, genetic transformation, gene mapping, DNA isolation and recombinant DNA techniques. Through tutorials, students learn the theory behind techniques and their use in research. Special focus is placed on lab manipulation skill, data organization, and data interpretation. Laboratory and tutorials."
BIOL 371 "Microbiology" "Prerequisite: Six credits chosen from BIOL 226, 261, CHEM 271; or permission of the Department. This course provides an in-depth study of the structure and function of microbes. It emphasizes the genetic and biochemical characteristics of microbes which distinguish them from plants and animals. Consideration is also given to the impact of microbes on the global environment and on the quality of human life. Lectures only."
BIOL 380 "Nutrition" "Prerequisite: CHEM 221, 271. The concept of a balanced diet is studied in relation to caloric content and to protein, lipid, carbohydrate, vitamin, and mineral requirements. The consequences of dietary deficiencies are examined. Special topics such as dieting, organic foods, vitamins, food additives, and toxins are discussed. Lectures only."
BIOL 382 "Comparative Animal Physiology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 225, 226, 266. This course offers a comparative analysis of physiological processes across diverse animal groups at the cellular and systems levels. Topics include endocrinology, muscle contraction, sensory integration, nervous systems, respiration, digestion, and circulation. Lectures and laboratory."
BIOL 385 "Entomology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 225; BIOL 226 previously or concurrently, BIOL 227 recommended. This course introduces the student to the variety and complexity of insect life. Basic classification is followed by a more detailed study of morphology and anatomy, together with some physiological considerations. Other topics such as adaptations for aquatic life and social behaviour are discussed. Laboratories include the identification of insects collected by students, as well as structured laboratory sessions which complement the lectures. Lectures and laboratory."
BIOL 398 "Intermediate Topics in Biology" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
BIOL 421 "(also listed as PHIL 441)" " Philosophical Foundations of Biology"
BIOL 422 "Advanced Statistics for Biological Sciences" "Prerequisite: BIOL 322. Within 45 credits of graduating with a BSc in a Department of Biology honours or specialization. This course presents, explains and provides practice with modern statistical tools applied to biological sciences for data exploration and hypotheses testing. The course provides students with the theoretical and practical knowledge to decide which techniques are best suited for particular biological problems, to report statistical results in an effective manner, and to apply their understanding to new biological questions. Examples and applications are drawn from a wide range of biological fields including ecology, epidemiology, genetics, molecular biology and genomics. Lectures and laboratory."
BIOL 423 "Scientific Communication" "Prerequisite: BIOL 490 previously or concurrently; permission of the Department. This course is designed to help students improve the clarity, fluency and accuracy of their written and oral scientific work. The course assignments and lessons are designed to develop and improve the following scientific communication skills: (i) research paper writing; (ii) oral presentations; (iii) scientific posters; and (iv) scientific communications to lay persons. Lectures only."
BIOL 443 "Plant Molecular Genetics" "Prerequisite: BIOL 367. This course covers a survey of specialized topics in plant molecular genetics including plant disease resistance, flower induction, signal transduction, bioinformatics and genetically modified organisms (GMOs) which have strongly influenced plant improvement in modern agriculture through genetic engineering. Lectures only."
BIOL 450 "Techniques in Ecology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 227, 322 or equivalent, and a minimum of six credits from BIOL 321, 350, 351, 353, 354. This course introduces students to a variety of techniques of experimental design, data collection, and quantitative analysis. Students participate in a series of modules, each of which presents experimental and analytical techniques appropriate for one area of modern research in ecology, behaviour, or evolution. Some modules require students to collect and subsequently analyze original data from field or laboratory settings. Modules and their contents may vary from year to year. Tutorials and laboratory."
BIOL 451 "Field Ecology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 322 or equivalent, BIOL 353. This course is designed to give students practical experience working with field-based community ecology. It involves one or two weeks of fieldwork in a research station (mandatory sleepover), followed by weekly meetings during the fall term. Students learn about sampling methods, experimental design, and statistical tools with the aim of estimating and comparing patterns of biological diversity. Students design and implement their own short study in the field. In the weekly meetings, students process samples collected in the field, perform analysis, present their results in the form of oral presentation as well as written assignment. Students reside in a field station during the field-based portion of the course. They are expected to cover the cost of room and board, and other necessary fees. The location and cost of the fieldwork may change from year to year. Interested students must contact the instructor to obtain detailed information."
BIOL 452 "Population and Conservation Genetics" "Prerequisite: BIOL 261; three credits chosen from BIOL 321, 351, 353, 367. Conservation genetics employ the principles of population genetics and systematics to address problems related to conservation of biodiversity. This course examines the main factors that affect genetic variation within and among populations, including natural selection, random genetic drift, mutation and gene flow. The impact of human activities on levels and patterns of genetic variation in both plant and animal communities is discussed. The utility of molecular markers in determining conservation units is examined. Several case studies from the current literature are used to illustrate the many applications of modern molecular techniques in conservation genetics. The course comprises lectures, student presentations, and use of software in genetic data analysis."
BIOL 457 "Conservation Biology" "Prerequisite: A minimum of nine credits chosen from BIOL 321, 350, 351, 353, 354. This course introduces students to the scientific principles of conservation biology, an interdisciplinary science which aims at identifying and managing environmental problems. Topics may include pollution, climate change, farming, renewable resources, designing nature reserves and conserving biodiversity. Course assignments emphasize effective scientific communication, collaboration and problem-solving skills. Lectures and tutorials."
BIOL 459 "Aquatic Ecology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 322 or equivalent, BIOL 353.The course begins with the molecular structure of water and its relationship to life in aquatic ecosystems. Lectures deal with primary and secondary production in streams, lakes, oceans and estuaries. The role of fish in aquatic communities is introduced in the second half of the course and is the subject of a field trip. Lectures, field trips, and laboratory."
BIOL 461 "Advanced Genetics" "Prerequisite: BIOL 367. Through lectures and directed readings in classical and contemporary genetics, students are exposed to research literature and problems in this area. Students probe in greater depth areas of particular interest in order to develop a critical sense and deepen an understanding of past and current work in this field. Lectures only."
BIOL 462 "Immunology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 266, 364, 367. The role of the immune system in maintenance of body homeostasis will be presented with particular reference to cells and tissues of the immune system, their organization as well as their structural and functional relationships. Topics include: maturation and differentiation of B and T lymphocytes; structure and properties of antibodies; immune responses to antigens; genetic aspects of anti-body synthesis; immunological considerations in AIDS, cancer, and autoimmune diseases. Lectures and seminars."
BIOL 463 "Comparative Genomics and Genome Evolution" "Prerequisite: BIOL 367. This course covers modern comparative genomics including the nature and scope of the various genome projects, gene discovery and data mining, molecular phylogenies, origin of the eukaryotic cell, evolution of gene regulatory networks, concerted evolution, and haplotype mapping. Lectures and seminars."
BIOL 466 "Advanced Techniques in Molecular Biology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 367, 368. This course covers the theory and practice of modern experimental procedures in molecular biology, including use of restriction enzymes, gene cloning and hybridizations, DNA sequencing, site-directed mutagenesis, RT-PCR, and yeast two-hybrid analysis. Laboratory and tutorials."
BIOL 467 "Advanced Cell Biology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 266, 364. This course examines selected topics in cell and molecular biology including the growth and division of differentiated and non-differentiated eukaryotic cells. The focus is on the control of cell cycling under normal and abnormal states, such as cancer and viral infection. Lectures only."
BIOL 468 "Gene Structure" "Prerequisite: BIOL 367. This course covers fundamental principles and essential concepts underlying the present understanding of gene expression in eukaryotes. Topics may include the role of RNA transcription, RNA localization, RNA transport and microRNAs in eukaryotic gene regulation; the role of DNA methylation, alternative splicing, the histone code and chromatin remodelling in genomic imprinting and epigenetics; and large scale approaches to understanding gene expression such as high throughput sequencing methods, genome wide profiling of mRNA expression, proteomics, and CHIP and CHIP-CHIP analysis. Lectures only."
BIOL 472 "Virology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 266, 367. The life cycles of viruses are discussed with emphasis on the molecular basis of their entry into, reproduction in, and exit from host cells. These life cycles are related to the pathogenicity of different groups of viruses to provide an understanding of the variety of viral diseases."
BIOL 473 "Environmental Microbiology " "Prerequisite: BIOL 371 or 353. This course surveys microbial diversity and ecophysiology with emphasis on how the activities and interactions of individual organisms influence Earth systems at the ecosystem scale. Topics may include the origin and evolution of the biosphere, microbial interactions and ecosystems, nutrient cycling, molecular and genomic methods in environmental microbiology, microbial associations with plants and animals, and the application of microorganisms to environmental sustainability and bioremediation, human welfare, health, and biotechnology. Lectures only."
BIOL 474 "Cellular Neuroscience " "Prerequisite: BIOL 364. This course familiarizes students with current theory and research in cellular neuroscience through student presentations and discussions of original scientific literature. Topics include neural circuitry, brain genomics, neuronal structure, synaptic plasticity, neurotransmission, and molecular basis of neurological disease. Lectures only."
BIOL 475 "Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology " "Prerequisite: BIOL 367. This is an interdisciplinary course offered to students who are either in Biology or Electrical and Computer Engineering programs. Students are introduced to the emerging field of synthetic biology and learn to design computational machines that can be implemented in biological media. The term is divided into two phases. In Phase I, Biology students learn basic computer hardware and software concepts, while Engineering students are introduced to gene structure and recombinant DNA technology. In Phase II, all students learn the principles and various applications of cell-based computational machines. Students work in teams to create a project proposal to describe the design of a computational machine using gene regulatory networks. Lectures only."
BIOL 480 "Bioinformatics " "Prerequisite: BIOL 367; within 30 credits of graduating with a BSc in a Department of Biology honours or specialization program and permission of the Department. In this course, students become familiar with the theory and methodologies of bioinformatics. The course is comprised of three general themes: (1) biological sequence data and evolutionary analysis, (2) structural and functional analysis of genes and genomes and (3) comparative genomics. Lecture material is supplemented by in-class activities, assignments and a bioinformatics project where students have the opportunity to apply their skills and knowledge to a self-generated research question."
BIOL 481 "Structural Genomics " "Prerequisite: BIOL 367; within 30 credits of graduating with a BSc in a Department of Biology honours or specialization program and permission of the Department. This course provides an overview of genome analysis including cloning systems; sequencing strategies; methods of detecting genes and approaches to mapping genomes. It covers the theory and design of the different approaches, and the analysis of genomic data generated from them. Lectures only."
BIOL 482 "Functional Genomics " "Prerequisite: BIOL 367; within 30 credits of graduating with a BSc in a Department of Biology honours or specialization program and permission of the Department. This course focuses on the functional analysis of expressed genes and their products. Course content includes cDNA library construction, expressed sequence tags (ESTs), functional analysis by gene knock-outs, localization of gene products by gene knock-ins, transcription profiling using microarrays and RNA-Seq, systematic identification of proteins using mass spectrometry, "
BIOL 484 "Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology " "Prerequisite: BIOL 367; within 30 credits of graduating with a BSc in a Department of Biology honours or specialization program and permission of the Department. This course provides an in-depth evaluation of current biotechnology tools used in pharmaceutical and forestry industries, and in environmental remediation. New technologies and genomic approaches that can be applied to these processes are also discussed. Lectures only."
BIOL 485 "Agriculture and Agri-Food Biotechnology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 367; within 30 credits of graduating with a BSc in a Department of Biology honours or specialization program and permission of the Department. This course provides an overview on the use of biotechnology in agriculture and in the agri-food industry. Plant genomics and genetic manipulation of plants are emphasized. Also discussed are biotechnology methods used in reducing agricultural pollutants and converting agricultural surplus to energy. Lectures only."
BIOL 486 "High-throughput Instrumentation " "Prerequisite: BIOL 367; within 30 credits of graduating with a BSc in a Department of Biology honours or specialization program and permission of the Department. This course provides an in-depth look at high-throughput instruments used in biotechnology and genomics. Students are exposed to technologies such as massively parallel sequencing, high-throughput genotyping, construction of DNA microarrays, proteomics, robotics platform, mass spectrometry, fluorescence-activated cell sorting, chemical screening, microfluidics, surface plasmon resonance, protein microarrays."
BIOL 490 "Independent Study" "Prerequisite: Within 30 credits of graduating with a BSc in a Department of Biology honours or specialization program and permission of the Department. In this course, the student undertakes a special research project selected in consultation with, and conducted under, the supervision of a faculty member of the Department. The project is intended to develop the students knowledge of standard scientific procedures, including methods of researching scientific literature, the planning and execution of experimental and analytical procedures, the writing of a formal report, and the presentation of a seminar on the project."
BIOL 498 "Advanced Topics in Biology" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
BSTA 445 "Statistical Software for Data Management and Analysis" "Prerequisite: COMM 215 or equivalent. This course presents the principles and techniques of widely used statistical software systems, such as SAS, for data management (information storage and retrieval), data modification, file handling, and statistical analysis and reporting. The course covers special features such as graphics, macro languages, software and/or library interfacing and the basics of data mining. Classes are to be held in computer labs and half of the time is devoted to lab work."
BSTA 450 "Statistical Models for Data Analysis" "Prerequisite: COMM 215. This course introduces and examines the role of contemporary statistical methods in improving business and industrial processes. The methodologies selected for discussion represent those that are most extensively used in contemporary business studies and analyses. The topics covered include modern statistical thinking, linear regression analysis, logistic regression, and experimental methods in product and process designs. The course involves mostly analyses of real-life data using statistical software packages. The understanding of the rationale of the methodologies introduced is also emphasized."
BSTA 477 "Managerial Forecasting" "Prerequisite: COMM 215 or equivalent. Reliable managerial forecasts of business variables must often be obtained against a background of structural changes in markets. This course focuses on the theory and applications of the most widely used methods of forecasting including decomposition methods, exponential smoothing, and the Box-Jenkins (ARIMA Building) techniques for non-seasonal and seasonal modelling. Recent approaches in forecasting such as artificial neural networks are also introduced. Business and economic databases are analyzed using statistical software packages in both class and project assignments."
BSTA 478 "Data Mining Techniques " "Prerequisite: COMM 215. The course covers essential ideas and techniques for extracting information from large amounts of data. It discusses both supervised and unsupervised methods, and covers topics such as dimension reduction, multiple regression, logistic regression, discriminant analysis, classification and regression trees, neural networks, association rules, cluster analysis and multi-dimensional scaling. Illustrations of the concepts and methods are given, and students gain practical experience in data mining with the use of popular data mining software."
BSTA 490 "Special Topics in Business Statistics" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course allows for more intensive examination of one or more topics in business statistics."
BTM 200 "Fundamentals of Information Technology" "This course covers topics in information and communications technologies, including software, hardware, the Internet, and office productivity applications. Students learn about the technologies and their use, as well as acquire hands-on experience in key software applications."
BTM 380 "Introduction to Business Application Development" "Prerequisite: COMM 226, 301. This course introduces students to the fundamentals of developing computer applications. Students gain knowledge and learn techniques necessary for building business applications, based on the modern object-oriented development paradigm. Students learn the principles of object-oriented programming using a contemporary language and integrated development environment. Topics include control structures, objects, classes, inheritance, class hierarchies, and polymorphism. Using appropriate business examples, this course enables students to solve business problems using the fundamentals of object-oriented programming."
BTM 382 "Database Management" "Prerequisite: COMM 226 or 301. This course provides a comprehensive foundation for designing, building, and working with databases, enabling students to understand and use commercially available database products effectively. The course examines different models of representing data with emphasis on the relational model. Topics include data modelling, database design, queries, transaction management, implementation issues, and an overview of distributed database management systems, data warehouses, databases in electronic commerce, and database administration. Examples are drawn from various functional and operational areas including enterprise and supply chain operations, management, and planning."
BTM 387 "E-Business " "Prerequisite: COMM 226 or 301. This course covers the essentials of how e-business is conducted and managed. Its major opportunities, limitations, risks, and issues for individuals, organizations, and society are discussed. Topics covered include e-business architectures, models, technologies, and privacy and security issues. Applications such as e-learning, e-government, and telemedicine are also discussed."
BTM 395 "Internet Programming" "Prerequisite: BTM 380. This course covers the concepts and tools used in programming of business systems that require Internet connectivity. Methods and technologies used to build web-based systems including e-business, e-learning, and online meeting places are discussed. The course gives students the opportunity to learn about and use such technologies as scripting, interactive charting, and database connectivity."
BTM 430 "Enterprise Resource Planning and Information Technology Integration" "Prerequisite: COMM 225, 226 or 301. This course responds to the demand for the integration of technological and business resources by providing the student with opportunities to understand and analyze practical business problems and processes via the use of enterprise resource planning (ERP) applications. Topics include analysis and design for information technology integration, implementation strategies, and use of ERP for process integration. Technological solutions examined include ERP software, middleware applications, and the use of web services."
BTM 440 "Business Information Systems Risks, Security and Audit" "Prerequisite: COMM 226 or 301. This course provides a comprehensive foundation of information systems governance, auditing and security. The first part of the course covers information systems risks, risk management, information technology (IT) controls, information systems governance standards and the processes to audit information systems. The second part focuses on key points of managing information security including business continuity planning, incident management, backups, restoration procedures and security policies. The course uses a combination of theory and applied learning through intensive cases and the completion of a hands-on IT auditing and security management project with the help of a computer-assisted auditing tool."
BTM 480 "Project Management" "Prerequisite: COMM 225 or 226 or 301. This course covers the theory, tools, and techniques associated with the management of projects including the use of project management software. Cases from various business contexts are used to illustrate essential steps in setting up project plans, scheduling work, monitoring progress, and exercising control to achieve desired results. The course integrates the Project Management Body of Knowledge with the Project Management Institutes certification requirements."
BTM 481 "Information Systems Analysis" "Prerequisite: BTM 382 previously or concurrently. This course covers the first phase of the systems development life cycle, which culminates in the systems proposal. Topics include the preliminary survey, analysis of existing systems and identification of deficiencies, the development of functional specifications, feasibility and cost/benefit analysis and development of a recommended course of action. In addition, various diagramming techniques are examined."
BTM 490 "Special Topics in Business Technology Management" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course allows for more intensive examination of one or more topics in business technology management."
BTM 495 "Information Systems Design and Implementation" "Prerequisite: BTM 380 or DESC 381 or DESC 391; BTM 382 or DESC 382; BTM 481 or DESC 481. The main objective of this course is to expose students to the concepts, tools, and techniques they need to transform the information system requirements, resulting from the system analysis phase, into system design specifications, and to transform the information system design specifications, resulting from the system design phase, into a system prototype. The course introduces the concepts, techniques, and methodologies of the object-oriented approach to information system design. The unified modelling language is used to develop design specifications for the systems. Topics include design of use case models, classes and class diagrams, interaction diagrams, and state chart diagrams."
BTM 496 "Information Technology Strategy, Management, and Sourcing " "Prerequisite: BTM 481 or DESC 481. This course addresses issues involved in administering the activities related to information technology (IT) resources in an organization. Topics covered include IT strategy, governance, sourcing, architecture, risk management, security policies, resource allocation, and change management. The course also covers areas related to the external environment of an organization such as the IT industry evolution, scanning, and its emerging solutions."
SCOM 361 "Management Science Models for Operations Management" "Prerequisite: COMM 225. This course deals with application of management science models to operations management problems in allocation of scarce human, physical, and financial resources. Among the topics covered are transportation, assignment and trans-shipment problems, integer linear programming, network models, multi-criteria decision problems, and waiting line models. The emphasis is on modelling issues and interpretation of solution through the use of optimization software packages."
SCOM 363 "Product Design and Business Process Re-Engineering (3 credits)" "Prerequisite: COMM 225 previously or concurrently. This course combines the product/service design issues and the continuous improvement efforts required throughout the life cycle of products and services. The topics covered in this context include essentials of creativity, organizational and operational issues in product/service design, mass customization, business process re-engineering, layout, and quality management. Cases and enterprise resource planning applications are studied to provide a unifying theme in terms of organizational change, supply chain re-engineering and integration aspects."
SCOM 372 "Supply Chain Planning and Control" "Prerequisite: SCOM 361 or DESC 361. Production/service planning and control issues in managing supply chains are covered in this course. Mathematical modelling is emphasized in dealing with facility location, capacity planning, demand and supply management, aggregate planning, scheduling, and inventory management decisions. Supplier evaluation/development practices and outsourcing are studied. Relevant enterprise resource planning modules with advanced planning and scheduling functionalities are introduced to illustrate the integration and coordination issues in supply chain planning and control."
SCOM 374 "Supply Chain Logistics" "Prerequisite: COMM 225. This course covers the tools and techniques associated with movement of materials throughout the supply chain. The topics covered include fundamentals of customer relationship management, distribution channels, purchasing, warehousing, transportation management, third part logistics, reverse logistics and issues in global logistics. Relevant enterprise resource planning modules are introduced and logistics games are played to illustrate the integration and coordination issues in supply chain logistics."
SCOM 490 "Special Topics in Supply Chain Operations Management " "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course allows for more intensive examination of one or more topics in supply chain operations management."
SCOM 491 "Supply Chain Risk Management " "Prerequisite: COMM 225. This course covers fundamental quantitative and qualitative tools of risk management used to mitigate against supply chain risks in the context of supply and demand management strategies. Globalization initiatives in trade and money markets and increased worldwide security concerns have exposed supply chains to ever-increasing risks. Consequently, risk management along the supply chain has become an important function in order to decrease the level of vulnerability for the stakeholders. Topics include review of supply chain fundamentals and principles, risk identification and management, trade-offs in risk management, supply chain strategies for robustness, and scenario planning. Various case studies are used to highlight design and implementation issues."
SCOM 492 "Supply Chain Simulation" "Prerequisite: BSTA 450; SCOM 372 or DESC 372 or SCOM 374 or DESC 374 previously or concurrently. This course focuses on simulating various supply chain scenarios using supply chain simulation package(s). Modelling issues in simulation are covered. Experimental design and analysis techniques are used in designing scenarios and analyzing the outcomes, which are also studied from a wider strategic business perspective."
SCOM 498 "" "Prerequisite: SCOM 372 or DESC 372 or SCOM 374 or DESC 374 previously or concurrently. This course involves a project carried out in a real-life setting. Guest speakers from industry are invited to present supply chain issues in practice. Various tools and techniques of supply chain operations management are used in identifying and analyzing supply chain problems. Improvements and solutions are designed along with appropriate performance metrics."
CART 210 "" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Computation Arts program or written permission of the Department. This course is a critical introduction to new media theory focusing on issues of interaction, inscription, representation, code, reproduction, spectacle, control, body and resistance. Students develop tools to undertake a critical analysis of media and technology and their social, political, economic, and cultural ramifications."
CART 211 "Creative Computing and Network Culture" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Computation Arts program or written permission of the Department. This course gives a broad introduction to the fundamentals of creative computing and network culture. Through readings and practical examples, students explore the histories of the Internet, computing, and interactivity as well as gain knowledge of fundamental technical tools used for creating network-based media."
CART 212 "Digital Media Studio I" "Prerequisite: CART 211; enrolment in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. This studio-based course focuses on the production of dynamic and interactive audio/visual media. Students develop proficiency in generating original audio and visual material as well as exposure to current digital media software. Concurrent with gaining knowledge of existing tools for production, students create a high-quality studio work for portfolio inclusion."
CART 214 "Visual Form and Communication" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Computation Arts program or written permission of the Department. Key themes of visual communication are explored in the context of computation arts. This studio course considers design elements such as line, pattern, shape, texture, interpretation of space, surface, perspective, dimension, repetition, randomness, colour and colour spaces, typography, drawing from observation, layout and composition and conceptualization. This class is predominantly non-digital and discusses the relationships between analog and digital approaches."
CART 215 "Introduction to Game Design" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Computation Arts program or the Minor in Game Design or written permission of the Department. Thiscourse is an introduction to the design of playful activities and games in particular. Students are introduced to terminology, conceptual frameworks, and critical approaches in order to develop a precise understanding of games at a formal and pragmatic level. Students acquire and develop tools to conceive, formalize, and communicate game design ideas."
CART 253 "Creative Computation I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization or Minor in Computation Arts or written permission of the Department. This course focuses on developing students programming abilities, beginning with basic concepts and building toward approaches of increasing complexity. Students put these concepts and techniques into practice by creating their own expressive digital media projects, exploring areas such as interactivity, play, sound, and video."
CART 263 "Creative Computation II" "Prerequisite: CART 253; or written permission of the Department. In this course, students build on developing proficiency in programming by engaging in larger-scale project work and learning to use more sophisticated data structures, algorithms, and code reuse. Emphasis is placed on developing ambitious and experimental applications that engage deeply with the underlying ideas of computation as a medium."
CART 310 "Interaction Design Studio " "Prerequisite: CART 210; 24 credits completed in a Computation Arts program or written permission of the Department. This course introduces the theories and practices of interaction design. Students learn about interaction design from the early history of computers and computation through to present-day best practice and experimental approaches still being developed. In the studio portion of the course, students apply the theory introduced by developing specific prototype works in multiple forms, including paper, video and digital prototypes."
CART 312 "Digital Media Studio II " "Prerequisite: CART 212; 24 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. This studio-based course furthers work done in CART 212, focusing on the production and authoring of dynamic audio/visual media using advanced techniques such as compositing and motion graphics. Students develop proficiency in generating original audio and visual material as well as exposure to current digital audio-visual-authoring software including postproduction environments such as After Effects and Motion. Concurrent with gaining knowledge of existing tools for production, students create a term-long project which will be a high quality, studio work appropriate for portfolio inclusion."
CART 315 "Digital Game Prototyping" "Prerequisite: CART 263 or COMP 218 or COMP 248; or written permission of the Department. Students study specialized game technology, create a series of digital game prototypes, and are introduced to higher level programming concepts pertaining to interactive applications. Efficient approaches to the design and development of complex interactive software, such as iterative development and rapid prototyping, are explored."
CART 345 "Digital Texts and Typography I" "Prerequisite: 24 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. This is a studio course in which students conduct experiments in digital text, type, and typography. It looks at how type can be used in dynamic, interactive, and performative contexts, how manipulating the appearance and behaviour of type affects the meaning of the text, and how to work with the materiality of letterforms. Class projects include motion typography for video, interactive texts, liquid/random/malleable fonts, and computationally responsive letterforms."
CART 346 "Digital Sound I: Theory and Practice of Real-Time Audio" "Prerequisite: 24 credits completed in a Computation Arts, Electroacoustics, or Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program; or written permission of the Department. This course is an introduction to the fundamental principles of real-time digital audio: the use of a computer to process, synthesize, and manipulate digitized representations of sound in real-time. Topics such as physics of sound, sampling, synthesis techniques, filters, and acoustics are introduced through the use of the real-time programming environments Max/MSP and Supercollider. Students experiment with digital audio techniques through lab exercises and the development of a final real-time composition/sound design work."
CART 347 "Digital Sound II: Sound Design" "Prerequisite: CART 346; 24 credits completed in a Computation Arts, Electroacoustics, or Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) program; or written permission of the Department. This course is a seminar/project studio in the conceptual and technical nature of digitally based sound design for film, video, and interactive multimedia (web, DVDs, games, sensor-augmented environments). Topics include sound and image fusion, audio-vision and conceptual/technical issues related to file and compression formats, spatialization (5.1), communication protocols, editing, mixing, tracking, asset creation and socio-cultural theories of audition. A term-long individual or group-based project is developed that takes participants through all phases of the sound design production workflow."
CART 351 "Networks and Navigation" "Prerequisite: CART 211, 212; CART 263 or COMP 248; 24 credits completed in a Computation Arts program or written permission of the Department. In this course, students develop interactive projects that use networked data, redefine online communities, and experiment with new communication structures. The perceptual and aesthetic aspects of digital media are addressed in relation to the technical skill sets required for navigating and understanding the possibilities and limits of networked environments."
CART 353 "Creative Computation III " "Prerequisite: CART 263 or written permission of the Department. In this course, students develop their programming skills via specific technologies and design perspectives, including but not limited to artificial life, evolutionary computation, procedural content generation, and playful design. The course focuses on students own studio practice as artist-programmers and supports their continuing exploration of the medium."
CART 355 "Topics in Kinetic Imagery" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in a Computation Arts program. This course provides an opportunity for the study of special topics in kinetic imagery. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
CART 356 "Topics in Abstract Soundscapes" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in a Computation Arts program. This course provides an opportunity for the study of special topics in abstract soundscapes. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
CART 357 "Topics in Digital Space" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in a Computation Arts program. This course provides an opportunity for the study of special topics in digital and immersive space. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
CART 358 "Topics in Senses and Perception" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in a Computation Arts program. Research into sensory perception, touch, and noise is key to project proposals, methodology, and production. Interdisciplinary referencing and collaborative projects are emphasized. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
CART 360 "Tangible Media and Physical Computing" "Prerequisite: CART 263* or COMP 248; 24 credits completed in a Computation Arts program or written permission of the Department. This course explores the concepts of tangible media and physical computation as well as related concepts of ubiquitous computing, wearable computing, and interaction design. The focus is on conceptual development, prototyping, and implementation of tangible media and physical computing artifacts from the perspectives of technical proficiency, functionality, aesthetics, and personal/social meaning."
CART 361 "" "Prerequisite: 24 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. In this studio course, students are introduced to the language, principles, and practices of 3D digital animation. Students are exposed to a wide range of traditional film animation techniques and learn the technical skills and conceptual strategies for 3D digital production."
CART 362 "" "Prerequisite: CART 361; 24 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. This intermediate studio furthers conceptual and technical skills related to 3D digital animation. Through film analysis, readings, and lectures, students study film animation aesthetics, contemporary film practice, and advanced 3D animation techniques."
CART 370 "" "Prerequisite: 24 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. A studio course in the creation and real-time processing of moving textures and video. This course surveys computer-based video art, particularly applied to installation or performance arts. It provides an introduction to mathematical approaches to real-time processing of 2D and higher-dimensional arrays, image and video filters, motion segmentation, and tracking blobs, optical flow, faces, and shapes."
CART 398 "Special Topics in Computation Arts" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Computation Arts program or written permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects and applications in computation arts. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
CART 410 "" "Prerequisite: CART 210, 310; or written permission of the Department. This course consolidates and contextualizes students existing understanding of their own practice by framing it in terms of research-creation. Related theoretical and methodological frameworks are introduced and discussed in order to give students the language and conceptual insight to think, write and speak convincingly about their own and others work."
CART 411 "" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program or written permission of the Department. In this course, students integrate skills with objects, narratives, and environments. They refine both critical and practical management skills in team-based projects."
CART 412 "" "Prerequisite: CART 411; 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. An advanced studio and theory course in which students integrate skills with objects, narratives, and environments. They refine both critical and practical management skills in team-based projects."
CART 414 "" "Prerequisite: CART 255; 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. This seminar prepares students for professional creation/research via analog or computational media and material arts, informed by philosophy of technology, art, and design. Topics may include continuity, transformation, distributed agency, responsivity, and tangibility."
CART 415 "" "Prerequisite: CART 315 or 353 or COMP 376; or written permission of the Department. This course introduces students to experimental game design, especially through the creation of their own unconventional and expressive digital games. A theoretical and critical understanding of play and games is established through lectures, discussion, game playing, game making and critiques. Students make multiple prototype games in order to better understand relationships between design, technology and the resulting player experience."
CART 416 "" "Prerequisite: CART 315 or 353 or COMP 376; or written permission of the Department. In this studio course, students engage in larger-scale, team-based, iterative game development projects. Specific attention is given to the design of games that have intended purposes alongside entertainment  whether these be expressive, critical, persuasive, or educational in nature. Working in teams, students move from developing a concept around a rhetorical/experiential intention, to designing and developing a digital game prototype, and finally to examining play outcomes. Practical work is in dialogue with theory drawn from game design, game studies and interaction design."
CART 433 "(also listed as DART 455)" ""
CART 434 "Advanced 3D Studio" "Prerequisite: CART 362; 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. This advanced studio builds upon 3D modelling for animation, gaming, and spatial environments. Concurrent with the development of technical skill sets, students develop thematic projects with consideration given to industry standards and cultural products for public or private enterprise."
CART 444 "" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. This studio course leads graduating Computation Arts students through an analysis and synthesis of a personal body of work, self-promotional material, and a framework for a group exhibition. Discussions and assignments address the technical, formal, and conceptual elements in their work, and strategies for documentation and presentation. Students are also expected to locate their work in a social, cultural, and historical context. Various future options for Computation Arts graduates are discussed, including careers in art, entrepreneurship, design, research, and academia."
CART 451 "" "Prerequisite: CART 351; 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program or written permission of the Department. This course introduces advanced topics in networked media, exploring the potential of connected technologies in multiple contexts, from their role in present-day life to potential future scenarios. Special attention is given to the design rhetorics and values commonly embedded in the web and internet-enabled devices and how students can work to subvert or repurpose these conventional approaches to design."
CART 453 "The Digital Nomad" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. This studio course is based on mobility or nomadic considerations in new media productions. Transportable and flexible equipment configurations are developed to support on-site performance events, projection, and multimedia installations."
CART 455 "Professional Internship I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; written permission of the Department. Students work in the industry for a period of nine to thirteen weeks to allow them to gain experience in design firms and multimedia companies. Internships approved for credit must be academically appropriate to the program."
CART 456 "Professional Internship II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; written permission of the Department. Students work in the industry for a period of nine to thirteen weeks to allow them to gain experience in design firms and multimedia companies. Internships approved for credit must be academically appropriate to the program."
CART 457 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; written permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for a limited number of students to pursue advanced studies in computation arts research and creation project under the supervision of a full-time faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the faculty supervisor is required before the independent study is approved."
CART 458 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; written permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for a limited number of students to pursue advanced studies in computation arts research and creation project under the supervision of a full-time faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the faculty supervisor is required before the independent study is approved."
CART 459 "Independent Study III" "Prerequisite: 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; written permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for a limited number of students to pursue advanced studies in computation arts research and creation project under the supervision of a full-time faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the faculty supervisor is required before the independent study is approved."
CART 460 "Bending Bits: Advanced Topics in Digital Media" "Prerequisite: CART 411 previously or concurrently; 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program; or written permission of the Department. An advanced studio course examining the ways computation can be deeply integrated into students creative practices. Projects look at how computation can be used to transform interactivity into a semantic strategy, input/output into a dialogue between the user, the work, and the world, and data processing into means of aesthetic exploration."
CART 461 "Tangible Media Studio" "Prerequisite: CART 360; 48 credits completed in a Computation Arts program or written permission of the Department. This studio course introduces advanced topics in tangible media and the related aesthetic and interaction design challenges and opportunities. Students work together on experimental projects that push the boundaries of physical interfaces and the expressivity of installation-based digital work."
CART 498 "Special Topics in Computation Arts" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Computation Arts program or written permission of the Department. An advanced course which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects and applications in digital fine arts. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
DART 221 "Visual Communication in Context" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Design or written permission of the Department. This studio course engages students in the study and application of graphic composition and visual communication. It focuses in particular on the elements and principles of layout and colour theory."
DART 261 "Introduction to Design Studies" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Design or written permission of the Department. This lecture course examines key themes in the history and theory of visual communication and the built environment from industrialization to the present day. Emphasis is given to current as well as future implications of design practice. Research methods in the discipline are introduced to facilitate development of students analytical and critical abilities, both oral and written."
DART 262 "Exploring Design Studies" "Prerequisite: DART 261; enrolment in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. This theory course introduces students to innovative and creative ways of thinking about design, and offers means of organizing their ideas effectively and convincingly. Referring to both historic and current examples of design theory and practice, coursework and assignments explore existing frameworks or models for design studies, enabling students to investigate critical aspects of visual communication and the built environment."
DART 263 "Design History and Sustainability" "Prerequisite: DART 221, 261; DART 291, 292 previously or concurrently; or written permission of the Department. This theory course offers students a reflective space to explore sustainable design theory and practice through historical artifacts, and thereby expand their intellectual engagement with key issues in past, present, and potential future approaches to design complexity and design for sustainability."
DART 280 "Investigations in Typographic Design" "Prerequisite: DART 221; DART 291, 292 previously or concurrently; or written permission of the Department. This studio course focuses on typographic design and explores the functional and expressive aspects of typography. Process-based assignments emphasize the principles of typography, information hierarchy, multiple-page content, and text-image relationships."
DART 291 "Design Process and the Materiality of Objects" "Prerequisite: DART 221, 261; or written permission of the Department. This studio course concentrates on the design process and provides students with communication strategies including sketching in perspective and technical drawing. Assigned projects address creativity, sustainable materials, and construction techniques."
DART 292 "Bio-Inspiration in the Design of Objects" "Prerequisite: DART 221, 261, 262 or 263, 291; DART 280 previously or concurrently; or written permission of the Department. This studio course advances the study of materials and construction methods. Assignments emphasize research and research methods specifically within the study of bionics. Students explore nature as inspiration to facilitate innovative and effective life cycles of designed objects."
DART 298 "Special Topics in Design Art" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Design or written permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for the study of special issues in Design. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
DART 331 "Words in Space" "Prerequisite: DART 280; DART 391, 392 previously or concurrently; or written permission of the Department. This studio course focuses on type and image in the built environment. Issues of space, materiality, and legibility are examined within architectural and urban landscapes. Students engage in projects ranging from wayfinding and signage to exhibition design and installations."
DART 332 "Print Concepts and Processes" "Prerequisite: DART 221, 261, 262 or 263, 280; 24 credits in the Design Major; or written permission of the Department. This studio course focuses on the conceptualization, process, and production of printed projects. Assignments relate content and narrative to the material nature of printed matter, printing techniques, and the responsible use of resources."
DART 335 "Interpretive Public Spaces" "Prerequisite: DART 380 or 381; DART 391, 392 previously or concurrently; or written permission of the Department. This studio course develops strategies for interactions in the public sphere. The application of scenography, planning of space and the integration of content orients the student towards the design of museum installations, mobile exhibitions, and performative events."
DART 339 "Second Skin and Soft Wear" "Prerequisite: DART 380 or 381; DART 391, 392 previously or concurrently; or written permission of the Department. This studio course contextualizes the making of and the concepts relating to soft surfaces, objects, furniture, and sculptural forms. Students are also encouraged to explore the sensory interfaces between surface and structure in design by investigating alternative material use and new technologies for innovative textile design, electronics, and body wear."
DART 349 "Introduction to Web Design" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in the Major in Design or written permission of the Department. This studio course introduces students to such aspects of web design as graphic user interface; navigation and information hierarchies; the differences between screen and print; and user experience; and explores the challenges facing designers working in an online environment. Students create websites for multiple platforms and mobile devices, as well as experiment with innovative ways of organizing information."
DART 380 "3D Digital Concepts" "Prerequisite: DART 280; 24 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. This computer lab course introduces students to computer-assisted 3D design concepts. Practical exercises advance technical skills and are combined with thematic proposals for virtual object representation. Scaled object production is encouraged in the final stages of the studio."
DART 381 "Digital Media and Moving Images" "Prerequisite: DART 280; 24 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. In this studio course, students generate concepts, thematic proposals, storyboards, and narratives for audiovisual presentations and creative works with a focus on online or web applications. Students develop projects for motion graphics, kinetic typography, as well as audio components."
DART 391 "Socio-Cultural Research and Practice" "Prerequisite: DART 221, 261, 262 or 263 , 280, 291, 292; 24 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. This studio course emphasizes the significance of research and context in the development of socio-cultural sustainability and collaborative design practice. Students experiment with word-image relationships exploring diverse mediums including small-scale publishing, soft surface design, dimensional packaging, and body wear."
DART 392 "Environmental Research and Practice" "Prerequisite: DART 261, 262 or 263, 291, 292, 391; 24 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. This studio course develops students expertise in design research and support applications for the built environment, through specific sustainable projects and community initiatives. Students work in collaboration with different stakeholders in the research, conceptualization, construction, and analysis stages of project design."
DART 398 "Special Topics in Design" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in the Major in Design or written permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for the study of special issues in design art. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
DART 440 "Un.bound in Perfect Print" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Design or written permission of the Department. This studio course focuses on producing aseries of self-directed conceptual or thematic book works. Projects are informed by studies of the history, craft and cultural significance of limited edition publications, unbound/bound bookworks, "
DART 441 "The Culture of Images" "Prerequisite: DART 491, 492 previously or concurrently; 48 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. In this theory course students analyze the impact of images through the study of popular culture and the persuasiveness of advertising in image-saturated and information-dense societies. Projects address strategies for effective visual communication as catalysts towards transformative socio-cultural environments."
DART 442 "Scenarios for Typography" "Prerequisite: DART 491, 492 previously or concurrently; 48 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. This studio course engages students to explore the diversity of typographic expression within a visual and literary context. Assignments are designed to address the significance and complexity of words for persuasive messaging, multilingual information exchange, and typographic play in visual communication."
DART 443 "Print: Meaning and Process" "Prerequisite: DART 491, 492 previously or concurrently; 48 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. This computer lab course focuses on graphic design in publishing systems. The implications of mass production, the responsible use of resources, and alternative print and packaging processes are key factors in the ecology of image production."
DART 444 "Portfolio Design" "Prerequisite: DART 491, 492 previously or concurrently; 48 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. In this studio course, students represent their design practice in a series of portfolio materials. Visual and written documentation are developed for print, digital media, and exhibition."
DART 445 "The Narrative Object" "Prerequisite: DART 380 or 381; DART 491, 492 previously or concurrently; 48 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. In this studio course, the mythic potential of objects as personal and cultural markers is considered in the context of everyday life. Students construct meaning through objects, responding to the potential for expression inherent in materials, structure, and form. The rigour of observation, analysis, and interpretation of object stimulates opportunities for multiple readings."
DART 446 "Studies in the Built Environment" "Prerequisite: DART 491, 492 previously or concurrently; 48 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. In this theory course, students explore physical space as a complex dynamic in which nature, architecture, things, and people continuously interact and influence each other. Students develop skills to explore such concepts as spatiality and materiality, to enhance their understanding of, and contributions to, the built environment."
DART 447 "The Future Life of Objects" "Prerequisite: DART 380; DART 491, 492 previously or concurrently; 48 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. This studio course encourages students to analyze the integration and impact of digital technologies in the production of three-dimensional objects and space design. Students examine current technologies and production and explore concepts for objects, enhancing the long-term value and use of objects within the built environment."
DART 448 "Nature-Inspired Environments" "Prerequisite: DART 380; DART 491, 492 previously or concurrently; 48 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. In this studio course, students examine natural systems to uncover design potential for the built environment. Students develop innovative approaches that advance sustainable design thinking through the study of intrinsic environmental geometries, behaviours, narratives, and life-cycle flows."
DART 449 "The Language of the Web" "Prerequisite: DART 349; 48 credits in the Major in Design or written permission of the Department. In this studio course, students develop online applications and innovative methods for organizing and disseminating information. Issues of interactivity, navigation, and open-source media are emphasized."
DART 450 "Web Intervention" "Prerequisite: DART 349; 48 credits in the Major in Design or written permission of the Department. In this studio course, students create socially engaged online interventions. Projects are informed by open-source culture, social media, and the effects of technological democratization."
DART 451 "Digital Interaction" "Prerequisite: DART 381; DART 491, 492 previously or concurrently; 48 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. This lab course considers the rhetoric of interactivity. The ubiquity of the graphic user interface is problematized through the use of non-linear narrative and metaphor. Students develop and select new paradigms for human-computer interaction."
DART 452 "Immersive Media" "Prerequisite: DART 381; DART 491, 492 previously or concurrently; 48 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. Students in this interdisciplinary lab course consider the expanded use of technologies for digital media in the context of 3D objects and environments. Through collaborative projects, students explore immersive installations integrating sound, video, interactivity, and performative events."
DART 453 "Design and Community Engagement" "Prerequisite: 24 credits in the Major in Design; or 24 credits in a Major in Fine Arts; or enrolment in the Loyola College for Diversity and Sustainabilitys Minor in Diversity and the Contemporary World; or written permission of the Department. A special project-based studio that provides students the opportunities to dialogue with and engage with Montreal-based outreach programs, community centres and not-for-profit organizations. Concordia students apply their communication and technical skill sets to collaborate with community partners and participants on specific design projects."
DART 455 "(also listed as CART 433)" ""
DART 456 "Inter.Net.Works" "Prerequisite: DART 349; 48 credits in the Major in Design or written permission of the Department. In this studio course, students study how audiovisual information is received, perceived and utilitized, with a focus on online identity through networked strategies. Modular and flexible frameworks are implemented so that communications/portfolios are sustainable, diverse and dynamic documents, which can be expanded, revised and abbreviated for a multi-sensory experience via computers, mobile devices or as printable documents."
DART 461 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Design and written permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for a limited number of students to pursue advanced studies in a design research and creation project under the supervision of a full-time faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the faculty supervisor is required before the independent study is approved."
DART 462 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Design and written permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for a limited number of students to pursue advanced studies in a design research and creation project under the supervision of a full-time faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the faculty supervisor is required before the independent study is approved."
DART 463 "Independent Study III" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Design and written permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for a limited number of students to pursue advanced studies in a design research and creation project under the supervision of a full-time faculty member. A clearly defined written agreement between the student and the faculty supervisor is required before the independent study is approved."
DART 471 "Professional Internship I" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Design and written permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for a limited number of students to further develop their design skill sets as an intern in a design firm or cultural organization such as a museum or graphic and industrial design association. A clearly defined written agreement between the student intern, the employer, and the full-time faculty supervisor is required before the internship is approved."
DART 472 "Professional Internship II" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Design and written permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for a limited number of students to further develop their design skill sets as an intern in a design firm or cultural organization such as a museum or graphic and industrial design association. A clearly defined written agreement between the student intern, the employer, and the full-time faculty supervisor is required before the internship is approved."
DART 491 "Discursive Design Research I" "Prerequisite: Final-year* standing in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. This core theoretical course combines lectures and discussions, emphasizing the contextual and societal implications of the design process from conception to production. Multidisciplinary approaches to design research and methodology allow students to advance the discourse of their own emerging design ethic and aesthetic."
DART 492 "Discursive Design Research II" "Prerequisite: DART 391, 392, 491; 48 credits in the Major in Design; or written permission of the Department. This core course explores the interstices between visual culture, material culture, and related theoretical discourses as disciplines which profoundly influence the design process. Particular attention is devoted to multidisciplinary engagement as applied to individual design scenarios. This course is a continuation of DART 491."
DART 493 "Post-Graduation Strategies in Design" "Prerequisite: DART 491 previously or concurrently; 48 credits in the Major in Design or written permission of the Department. In this seminar course, students have the opportunity to explore subject matter related to both professional practice and graduate studies. Topics related to the former include eco-focused business or sustainable business models, eco-conscious design practice, time-planning strategies, intellectual property (copyrights, patents), funding models and business start-ups. Topics related to potential graduate studies include grant writing, selection of graduate programs, and research project proposals."
DART 498 "Special Topics in Design" "Prerequisite: 48 credits in the Major in Design or written permission of the Department. A course for advanced students which provides an opportunity for the study of special issues in design art. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
CATA 262 "Emergency Care in Sport and Exercise" "Prerequisite: EXCI 253 previously or concurrently; enrolment in an Exercise Science program. This course identifies common emergency situations in the athletic environment, and provides theoretical and practical components of management skills to safely deal with these situations. Specific signs and symptoms of basic emergency conditions are discussed. Planning of events to prepare for sport-related emergencies and administration of initial emergency techniques are included. Lectures and laboratory."
CATA 263 "Principles of Athletic Therapy" "Prerequisite: CATA 262; enrolment in an Exercise Science program. The course considers topics in athletic therapy from professional, preventive, and pathological perspectives. The course deals with injury classification, clinical flexibility, strength testing, cryotherapy, and sports dermatology. Preventive techniques such as pre-season physical examinations, protective equipment, hazard recognition, and taping techniques are also addressed. Acute and chronic pathologies associated with physical activity, as well as issues including sudden death and communicable diseases in athletics, and the adolescent athlete are discussed. Lectures and laboratory."
CATA 337 "Assessment of the Upper and Lower Extremities" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of Stage I* in the major; enrolment in the BScAT. This course examines normal function of the upper and lower extremities of the human body. Abnormal function and various pathologies of these structures are addressed in depth. Making use of principles based on applied anatomy and physiology, students learn about clinical assessment procedures and implementation of evaluation methods addressing orthopaedic dysfunction. Types of surgical procedures are discussed. Lectures and laboratory."
CATA 339 "Rehabilitation of the Upper and Lower Extremities" "Prerequisite: CATA 337 previously or concurrently; successful completion of Stage I* in the major; enrolment in the BScAT. This course examines concepts in the rehabilitation process including tissue healing, and introduces students to various exercise protocols and manual techniques specific to the upper and lower extremities. Students learn how to implement safe and effective rehabilitation protocols to address orthopaedic dysfunction of these areas. Patient education to facilitate rehabilitation, documentation treatment plans and treatment outcomes are addressed. Lectures and laboratory."
CATA 348 "Therapeutic Modalities in Sports Medicine" "Prerequisite: CATA 337, 339; successful completion of Stage I* in the major; enrolment in the BScAT. Students are introduced to the parameters of therapeutic modalities and their physiological effects. Various modalities such as heat, cold, ultrasound, muscle stimulation, interferential current and Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation (T.E.N.S.) are examined. For each modality, topics include instrumentation, set-up, and practical application. Basic concepts of manual treatment approaches, such as mobilizations, myofascial release, traction, and massage, are introduced. Indications and contraindications and precautions for all treatments are presented. Lectures and laboratory."
CATA 365 "Athletic Therapy Field Internship I " "Prerequisite: Successful completion of Stage I* in the major; enrolment in the BScAT; permission of the Department. This course offers students the opportunity to work in an emergency or preventive setting with a sports team, although some clinical component may be introduced. Students must be certification candidates of the Canadian Athletic Therapists Association (CATA) and the Corporation des thrapeutes du sport du Qubec (CTSQ). This course involves a commitment of 400 hours over two terms. Weekly seminars with agency supervisors are mandatory."
CATA 437 "Assessment of the Hip, Spine and Pelvis" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the BScAT. CATA 337, 339; enrolment in BScAT. This course examines normal function of the hip, spine, and pelvis of the human body. Abnormal function and various pathologies of these structures are addressed in depth. Making use of principles based on applied anatomy and physiology, students learn about clinical assessment procedures and implementation of evaluation methods addressing orthopaedic dysfunction. Surgical procedures are discussed. Lectures and laboratory."
CATA 439 "Rehabilitation of the Hip, Spine and Pelvis" "Prerequisite: CATA 437 previously or concurrently; completion of Stage II* in the BScAT. This course examines concepts in rehabilitation, introducing the students to various exercise protocols and manual techniques specific to hip, spine, and pelvis. Students learn how to implement advanced, safe, and effective rehabilitation protocols to address orthopaedic dysfunction of these areas. Lectures and laboratory."
CATA 441 "Concepts in Manual Therapy " "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage III* in the BScAT. This course provides students with an understanding of the fundamental theory and practical basis for using various manual therapy techniques to keep athletes competition-ready, to help in their recovery from injury, and to improve their performance. The course explains various techniques in detail and describes the procedures involved in conducting effective treatment sessions. Muscle Energy, Active Release, Myofascial Release, and Sports Massage are some of the techniques discussed, demonstrated, and practised. Determining goals and organization of a treatment session, and the choice and application of techniques are also discussed. The goal of the course is to help athletic therapists determine the most appropriate manual therapy techniques for a variety of orthopaedic pathologies. Lectures and laboratory."
CATA 447 "Special Topics in Athletic Therapy" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the BScAT. This course focuses on recent research outcomes and new issues in athletic therapy specific to prevention, assessment, and rehabilitation of athletic injuries. The course content varies within the domains of the Canadian Athletic Therapists Association depending upon the most current issues such as surgical techniques, new medications, advanced assessment and modality techniques, and issues related to professional development and the workplace environment. Information is presented from a variety of courses and disciplines to enhance the knowledge base received from core Athletic Therapy courses. Lectures only."
CATA 462 "Advanced Emergency Care" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the BScAT. This course completes the preparation of Athletic Therapy students in the area of emergency care of sports-related injury. It identifies the less common and more complicated emergency situations experienced in the athletic therapy setting. Advanced theoretical and practical components are presented. This course develops the ability of the student to care for the athlete beyond the initial stages of emergency management and towards advanced life support. Lectures and laboratory."
CATA 475 "Athletic Therapy Clinical Internship I" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the BScAT. Students must be certification candidates of the Canadian Athletic Therapists Association and the Corporation des thrapeutes du sport du Qubec. The course offers a minimum 400-hour supervised work opportunity. Under the supervision of a Certified Athletic Therapist, students are shown basic administrative skills as seen in private rehabilitation clinics or within the Department of Health, Kinesiology, and Applied Physiology."
CATA 485 "Athletic Therapy Field Internship II" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage III* in the BScAT. This course offers students the opportunity to work in an emergency or preventive setting with a sports team, although some clinical component may be introduced. Students must be certification candidates of the Canadian Athletic Therapists Association (CATA) and the Corporation des thrapeutes du sport du Qubec (CTSQ). This course involves a minimum commitment of 200 hours over one or two terms. Weekly seminars with agency supervisors are mandatory."
CATA 495 "Athletic Therapy Clinical Internship II" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage III* in the BScAT. Students must be certification candidates of the CATA and the CTSQ. The course offers a supervised period of work in a rehabilitation or athletic therapy clinic, for a minimum of 200 hours including a weekly seminar."
EXCI 202 "The Body Human: Form and Function" "This course provides insight into the manner in which common injuries and diseases impact on the anatomical structures and functional systems of the body. The various medical treatments and procedures available to maintain or restore the structural and functional integrity of the body are also addressed. Conditions of a cardiovascular, pulmonary, neuromuscular, metabolic and oncologic nature are discussed."
EXCI 204 "Food for Sport" "The course introduces students to a basic understanding of how the digestive system functions, and then examines the role of diet on sport performance. Students learn about the impact of the major food stuffs (carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, minerals, water) on performance outcomes. The use of ergogenic aids commonly used to enhance sport performance are also discussed with respect to their effectiveness. Caloric balance, diet and body composition are also discussed relevant to specific sport requirements."
EXCI 206 "The Science of Sport" "The course introduces basic and practical knowledge of human movement in sports and physical activity. Anatomical and physiological knowledge pertinent to body movement is presented in simple and meaningful terms. Biomechanical concepts and principles applied to body movement in different sports and physical activities are also addressed. Consideration is also given to nutritional aspects and injury prevention in sport and exercise."
EXCI 218 "Physical Growth and Maturation" "This course considers normal and abnormal growth and maturation patterns of the musculoskeletal, neural, hormonal, cardiovascular, and respiratory systems of the body. In addition, socialization and psychosocial development processes with relevance to an exercise or sports environment are examined. These patterns and processes are investigated from childhood through adolescence and adulthood. Lectures only."
EXCI 233 "Current Issues in Personal and Community Health" "This course presents an overview of factors influencing personal and community health. Students are exposed to prevalent physical and mental health issues from biological, psychological, and sociological points of view. Health-related consequences of alcohol abuse, drugs, birth control, sedentary lifestyle, eating disorders, and communicable diseases are among the topics considered. Lectures only."
EXCI 251 "Fundamentals of Health and Physical Activity" "The basic and contemporary issues of health and physical activity are discussed. General topics regarding the benefits of physical activity are examined from anatomical and physiological perspectives. Upon completion, students are able to apply the principles of fitness and wellness to their own lives, to assess their current level of fitness and wellness, to create plans for changing their lifestyle to reach wellness, and to monitor their progress using the health-related components of physical fitness: body composition, cardiovascular endurance, muscular strength and endurance, and flexibility. Lectures only."
EXCI 252 "Introduction to Physical Activity, Health and Fitness" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an Exercise Science program. This course focuses on the fundamentals of fitness assessment and the design of individualized exercise programs compatible with the responsibilities of a health/fitness instructor. Topics of study include screening clients for fitness testing and physical activity participation; the selection of appropriate tests to assess the health-related components of physical fitness such as body composition, cardiovascular endurance, muscular strength, local muscular endurance, and flexibility; interpretation of test results; and the application of exercise principles in the design of safe and effective individualized exercise prescriptions of the apparently healthy client. Lectures and laboratory."
EXCI 253 "Human Anatomy I: Musculoskeletal Anatomy" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an Exercise Science program. The major focus of this course covers the anatomy of the musculoskeletal system and accompanying (peripheral) circulatory and neurological systems. It also addresses introductory terminology and tissue differentiation. The structures are examined through approaches of surface anatomy, current and traditional media and/or cadaver examination. Lectures and laboratory."
EXCI 254 "Human Anatomy II: Systemic Anatomy" "Prerequisite: EXCI 253; enrolment in an Exercise Science program. The major focus of this course covers the anatomy of the central circulatory and central respiratory systems. It also addresses the anatomy of the brain and spinal column as well as the integumentary, digestive, and urogenital systems. The structures are examined through approaches of surface anatomy, current and traditional media and cadaver examination. Lectures and laboratory."
EXCI 258 "Human Physiology I: Musculoskeletal, Neuromuscular, and" " Bioenergetic Systems from Rest to Exercise "
EXCI 259 "Human Physiology II: Cardiovascular and" " Respiratory Systems from Rest to Exercise "
EXCI 298 "Selected Topics in Exercise Science" ""
EXCI 299 "Selected Topics in Exercise Science" ""
EXCI 310 "Research Methods" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage I* in the major. This course provides students with a general overview of investigative research and the nature of scientific inquiry. Students receive instruction in critical inquiry and appraisal, research design, research ethics, and the role research plays in the development of professional practice/skills. Finally, this course provides the necessary knowledge and practical experience to enable students to plan and run an experimental project, including an understanding of the process of data collection, analysis, interpretation, and presentation. Lectures only."
EXCI 322 "Statistics for Exercise Science" "Prerequisite: EXCI 310 previously or concurrently; successful completion of Stage I* of the major; enrolment in the honours; or permission of the Department. This course builds on students experience derived from EXCI 310 to advance their knowledge of the research process by providing details of statistical techniques and methods that are common in exercise science. Lectures only."
EXCI 351 "Introduction to the Biomechanics of Human Movement" "Prerequisite: PHYS 204, 224 or equivalent; completion of Stage I* of the major. The primary focus of this course concentrates on the mechanical principles of human movement. Fundamental principles of kinematics and kinetics are examined in a theoretical and practical context. Lectures and laboratory."
EXCI 352 "Essentials of Exercise Testing and Training in Athletic Populations" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage I* in the major. This course utilizes the students background knowledge of anatomy, physiology, biomechanics, exercise physiology, and exercise programming to design pre-season, in-season, and post-season conditioning programs for elite athletes in a variety of sports. Most importantly, this course focuses on the importance of applying scientific principles of training in the design of exercise programs for elite athletes. The importance of skill-related (i.e. speed, agility, and power) and health-related components (i.e. cardio-respiratory endurance, and muscle strength) of physical fitness relative to performance is emphasized in this course. Some of the topics covered include ergogenic aids, regulation of skeletal muscle mass, periodization, aerobic endurance and resistance exercise training, and plyometrics. Lectures and laboratory."
EXCI 360 "Neural and Hormonal Control of Human Systems" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage I* in the major. Basic principles of the neural control of human movement, including reference to the sensory systems (visual, auditory, vestibular, proprioceptive and kinesthetic) are discussed. Topics of hormonal influences affecting musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, respiratory systems and metabolism are included. Lectures only."
EXCI 398 "Selected Topics in Exercise Science" ""
EXCI 399 "Selected Topics in Exercise Science" ""
EXCI 420 "Physical Activity Epidemiology" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the major, honours, KCEP or BScAT. This course surveys the health-related aspects of exercise, physical activity, and physical fitness from the perspective of epidemiology. Topics include an introduction to the epidemiological process, the relationship between physical activity and disease (e.g. cardiovascular disease, obesity, cancer, mental illness), the biological mechanisms for healthy adaptations to physical activity, the behavioural determinants of physical activity, and public policy implications of the current literature."
EXCI 421 "Honours Seminar: Current Topics in Health and Exercise Science" "Prerequisite: EXCI 322; enrolment in an honours program or permission of the Department. Using a combination of guest speakers and student presentations, this seminar is geared to critically examining current issues and methods in health and exercise science. Its emphasis is on theoretical and/or methodological issues as they relate to selected topics from these areas. Examples of topics include ethical issues and new emerging theories in health and exercise science, and utility of a particular research technique or methodology. Lectures only."
EXCI 426 "Honours Thesis" "Prerequisite: EXCI 421 previously or concurrently; enrolment in an honours program and completion of Stage II* in the honours. This course requires the student to propose and conduct a study and submit a thesis according to a recognized and approved scientific journal format. The work is supervised by a thesis chair selected by the student from within the Department."
EXCI 440 "Current Developments in the Biochemistry of Exercise" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the major, honours, KCEP or BScAT. This course offers an in-depth examination of the current topics and literature in biochemistry, cellular and molecular biology, and physiology as they relate to the adaptations associated with physical activity, exercise training, or disease. The course is designed to integrate knowledge from the disciplines of Exercise Science, Biochemistry, and Biology, to facilitate the synthesis and evaluation of new ideas, and to promote the effective oral and written communication of these ideas."
EXCI 445 "Nutrition in Exercise and Sport" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the major, honours, KCEP or BScAT. This course provides an overview of the anatomy and in-depth study of the physiology of the digestive system prior to examining the significance of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins as essential nutritional requirements for physical activity and optimal performance. The importance of trace minerals and vitamins is also discussed. Specific issues such as the use of nutritional beverages, ergogenic aids, eating disorders, and nutritional concerns of athletes are some of the topics presented. Lectures only."
EXCI 451 "Clinical Biomechanics" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the major, honours, KCEP or BScAT. This course addresses biomechanical aspects of the most common structural and neurological abnormalities of the spine resulting in pathological gait. It also addresses the mechanics of tissue and joint injury of the head, neck, torso, and extremities. Lectures only."
EXCI 453 "Stress, Health and Disease" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the major, honours, KCEP or BScAT. This course is an introduction to the role stress plays in health and disease. Topics dealt with in this seminar-based course include defining and measuring stress, the relationship between stress and disease (e.g. cardiovascular disease, asthma, cancer, infectious illness), the pathophysiology of stress, and current issues and controversies in behavioural medicine."
EXCI 455 "Physical Activity, Health and Aging" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the major, honours, KCEP or BScAT. This course addresses the health status, physical fitness, exercise patterns, and effectiveness of exercise prescription for the well elderly and those exhibiting symptoms of chronic diseases which commonly accompany the aging process. Lectures and laboratory."
EXCI 458 "Pediatric Exercise Science" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the major, honours, KCEP or BScAT. This course introduces students to the anatomical, physiological, and psychosocial issues related to exercise and physical activity in children. Topics include influence on growth and health, injury potential, endurance exercise, weight training, youth in sport, competitive and collaborative play, stress in childhood, and the strategies for improving exercise habits of children. Lectures only."
EXCI 460 "Integrative Human Physiology " "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the major, honours, KCEP or BScAT. This course uses physiological homeostasis and the function of major organ systems as its basis. Students learn how the different systems act in an integrative fashion and how the body adjusts to various challenges to the maintenance of homeostasis. The focus is on five specific organ systems  the neural, muscular, cardiovascular, respiratory and renal systems. Students learn how these systems interactively function during health, exercise and disease."
EXCI 461 "Pharmacology for Sport and Exercise" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the major, honours, KCEP or BScAT. This course provides the latest information on over-the-counter and prescription medications commonly used in sport. It offers a sound review of pharmacology and pharmokinetic principles and explores the latest practice implications for certified athletic therapists and exercise specialists. The course includes indications, contraindications, and side effects of common therapeutic medications used in sport. Class discussions also cover natural products and the effects of their interactions with prescription and non-prescription pharmaceuticals."
EXCI 471 "Pain Management Strategies " "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the major, honours, KCEP or BScAT. This course relates theory and research to the practical experiences of client/athletic-practitioner interactions, relationships, and interventions. It addresses pain management principles as they relate to illness, injury, and rehabilitation. Lectures only."
EXCI 492 "Independent Study in Exercise Science" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the major, honours, KCEP or BScAT. This course provides an opportunity to conduct a small-scale scientific research project under the supervision of a faculty member from the Department. In consultation with a faculty member, the student selects a topic, formulates a research methodology, collects data, analyzes the results, and writes a formal research report."
EXCI 498 "Advanced Topics in Exercise Science" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department."
EXCI 499 "Advanced Topics in Exercise Science" "Specific topics for these courses, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
KCEP 210 "Principles of Clinical Exercise Physiology" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an Exercise Science program. This course considers topics in kinesiology and clinical exercise physiology from historical, professional, and applied perspectives. Introduction of exercise training principles and movement activity as the basis for patient rehabilitation and recovery programs in chronic diseases are discussed. The course deals with disease classification, basic intervention concepts, and preventive approaches. Ten observation hours are required for students who wish to transfer to the KCEP program."
KCEP 311 "Pathophysiology in Clinical Exercise Science I" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of Stage I* in the major; enrolment in the KCEP. This course reviews pathophysiology, medical intervention techniques, and medication profiles of the most common neuromuscular and orthopaedic diseases and disabilities. Lectures only."
KCEP 349 "Assessment, Interpretation, and Rehabilitation in Neuromuscular Physiology " "Prerequisite: KCEP 311 previously or concurrently; successful completion of Stage I* in the major; enrolment in the KCEP. Thiscourse focuses on the assessment and rehabilitation of neurological, neuromuscular, and musculoskeletal fitness in the clinical setting. Measurement and interpretation of normal and abnormal responses for individuals with common neurological, neuromuscular and musculoskeletal diseases and disabilities are discussed and performed. Lectures and laboratory."
KCEP 383 "Kinesiology and Clinical Exercise Physiology Internship I" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of Stage I* in the major; enrolment in the KCEP. This course provides students the opportunity to observe and participate in physical activity programming offered for special populations (i.e. persons with neurological and physical impairments) in a supervised setting. This course involves a commitment of 120 hours including a weekly seminar."
KCEP 411 "Pathophysiology in Clinical Exercise Science II" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the KCEP. This course reviews pathophysiology, medical intervention techniques, and medication profiles of the most common cardiovascular, respiratory, oncologic and metabolic diseases. Lectures only."
KCEP 449 "Physical Fitness Assessment, Exercise Prescription and" " Rehabilitation in Special Populations"
KCEP 483 "Kinesiology and Clinical Exercise Physiology Internship II" "Prerequisite: Completion of Stage II* in the KCEP. The course offers a supervised period of work as activity leader/exercise specialist in a hospital or rehabilitation centre assisting in performing physiological evaluations, designing exercise programs, and animating physical activities. The course involves a commitment of 120 hours including a weekly seminar."
CATS 210 "Introduction to Creative Arts Therapies" "Students are introduced to the basic concepts and practices of creative arts therapies, including visual art, drama, music, and dance. Students study general theories and themes common to all of the creative arts therapies that may include creative projection, the role of the witness, expression, symbols, meaning making, and therapeutic alliance. These themes are explored through readings, videos, assignments, blogs and creative journals. Students are introduced to specific sites where creative arts therapists practise with diverse populations to gain a basic understanding of how the creative arts therapies function and the range of professional practices."
ATRP 301 "An Introduction to Art Therapy" "Prerequisite: 30 credits; PSYC 200 or equivalent; six credits in Studio Arts. This course provides an introduction to the subject andprofession of art therapy, including its history, key processes, and selected approaches. Didactic and experiential components provide students with a broad understanding of the application of basic concepts in art therapy."
DTHY 301 "An Introduction to Drama Therapy" "Prerequisite: 30 credits; PSYC 200 or equivalent; permission of the Department of Creative Arts Therapies. This course provides an introduction to the subject and profession of drama therapy, including its history, key processes, and selected approaches. Didactic and experiential components provide students with a broad understanding of the application of basic concepts in drama therapy."
MTHY 301 "An Introduction to Music Therapy" "Prerequisite: 30 credits; PSYC 200 or equivalent; six credits in Music. This course provides an introduction to the subject and profession of music therapy, including its history, key processes, and selected approaches. Didactic and experiential components provide students with a broad understanding of the application of basic concepts in music therapy."
CHEM 203 "Forensic Analysis" "This course introduces the nonscience student to the fundamentals of chemical analysis as it is used in modern forensics. It introduces the basic concepts of the scientific method, molecules and chemical reactions, primarily focusing on chemical analysis. The key techniques used in modern forensics are presented with applications in drug, DNA, fingerprint, explosive and combustion/arson analysis."
CHEM 204 "From Alchemy to Modern Chemistry: A Historical Evolution of Chemistry" "This course examines the development of chemistry before the 20th century from the Greek, Chinese and Islamic religions and philosophies to the development of measurement and instrumentation to analyze matter. The objective is to understand the roots of modern chemistry, and look at contributions and principles that are representative of the period in which they emerged."
CHEM 205 "General Chemistry I" "Stoichiometry, states of matter, atomic structure, electron structure of atoms, the periodic table, periodic properties, bonding, solids. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 206 "General Chemistry II" "Prerequisite: CHEM 205. Thermochemistry, solutions and their properties, equilibrium, ionic equilibrium, pH, buffers, kinetics, reaction mechanisms, other selected topics related to biochemistry, biology, and engineering. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 208 "Chemistry in Our Lives" "This course is designed as an introduction to chemistry for nonscience students. It concentrates on establishing the chemical concepts and vocabulary necessary to understand the many roles chemistry plays in peoples daily lives. Issues to be presented will range from design and testing of drugs to protection of the ozone layer. The chemical phenomena, methodology, and theory will be presented as needed to understand the various issues covered in the course. Lectures only."
CHEM 209 "Discovering Biotechnology" "The course begins with an exploration of the roles of genes and proteins in life processes. It then proceeds to an examination of the basic scientific principles behind manipulation of biological molecules to produce desired changes. Students are introduced to the specific applications of the technology to medicine, agriculture, and the environment. Economic and ethical issues raised by biotechnology are also examined."
CHEM 212 "Analytical Chemistry for Biologists" "Prerequisite: CHEM205, 206; PHYS204, 206, 224, 226; MATH 205; or equivalents for "
CHEM 217 "Introductory Analytical Chemistry I" "Prerequisite: CHEM205, 206; PHYS204, 206, 224, 226; MATH203, 205; or equivalents for "
CHEM 218 "Introductory Analytical Chemistry II" "Prerequisite: CHEM 217. Chemical equilibria and titration curves of oxidationreduction, precipitation, and nonaqueous systems; potentiometry and potentiometric titrations; introduction to spectroscopy with emphasis on molecular and atomic absorption spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 221 "Introductory Organic ChemistryI" "Prerequisite: CHEM205, 206. Basic aspects oforbitals and their role in covalent bonding; delocalization of electrons. Alkanes: structure, nomenclature, isomerism, reactions. Introductory stereochemistry: enantiomers, diastereomers, conformers, Fischer and Newman projections, specification of chirality, E/Z isomerism. Conformations of cyclic compounds. Alkylhalides: S<sub>N</sub>1; S<sub>N</sub>2; E1; E2 reaction mechanisms. Freeradical reactions, organometallic compounds. Chemistry of alkenes, alkynes, and dienes. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 222 "Introductory Organic ChemistryII" "Prerequisite: CHEM 221. Introduction to the use of IR and NMR spectroscopy for the identification of simple organic compounds. Benzene and aromatic compounds: aromaticity, electrophilic aromatic substitution, nucleophilic aromatic substitution, substituent effects. Chemistry of aldehydes and ketones: nucleophilic addition, oxidation, reduction, and condensation reactions, tautomerism. Chemistry of carboxylic acidsand their derivatives. Chemistry of alcohols, ethers, and related compounds. Amines: basicity, reactions. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 234 "Physical Chemistry I: Thermodynamics" "Prerequisite: CHEM205, 206; PHYS204, 206, 224, 226; MATH203, 205; or equivalents for "
CHEM 235 "Physical Chemistry II: Kinetics of Chemical Reactions" "Prerequisite: CHEM234. Mathematical treatment of experimental results; theories of reaction rates; unimolecular reactions; the steadystateapproximation; factors influencing rates of reactions in solution; acidbase catalysis; catalysis by enzymes and the MichaelisMenten mechanism; freeradical reactions; photochemical reactions; experimental methods and techniques. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 241 "Inorganic Chemistry I: Introduction to Periodicity and Valence Theory" "Prerequisite: CHEM205, 206; PHYS204, 206, 224, 226; MATH203, 205; or equivalents for "
CHEM 242 "Inorganic Chemistry II: The Chemistry of the Main Group Elements" "Prerequisite: CHEM241. A survey of theproperties and reactions of: hydrogen; Group1, lithium to cesium; and Group2, beryllium to radium; including the theory of ionic bonding andstructure. The descriptive chemistry of Group13, boron to thallium; Group 14, carbon tolead; Group15, nitrogen to bismuth; Group 16, sulphur to polonium; Group 17, the halogens; and Group18, the chemistry of the noble gases. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 271 "Biochemistry I" "Prerequisite: CHEM 221. An introduction to the essentials of biochemistry: protein structure, enzymology, carbohydrate metabolism, electron transport, integration and regulation of metabolism. Lectures, tutorials and laboratory."
CHEM 293 "Spectroscopy and Structure of Organic Compounds" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222. This course examines the identification of organic compounds using methods based on electronic, vibrational, nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectroscopies. In each case, there is an introduction to the principles of the spectroscopy and a discussion of how its spectra vary with structure. Particular emphasis is placed upon the UVvisible spectra of conjugated molecules; the identification of functional groups by IR spectroscopy; the use of NMR spectroscopy, including 2D methods, for the determination of stereochemistry; and the use of mass spectrometry for ascertaining molecular constitution. The use of computer simulation and information retrieval for structure determination is introduced. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 298 "Selected Topics in Chemistry" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
CHEM 312 "Intermediate Analytical Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 218. A continuation of CHEM 217 and 218, with emphasis on instrumental methods of analysis. Emission spectroscopy; Xray spectroscopy; voltammetry and polarography; amperometric titrations; coulometry and coulometric titrations, conductometry; chromatography with particular emphasis on gas chromatography, and high performance liquid chromatography. Laboratory is taken concurrently and provides experience in analytical techniques described in lectures. Lecturesand laboratory."
CHEM 324 "Organic Chemistry III: Organic Reactions" "Prerequisite: Students must have completed a minimum of 15 credits in chemistry including CHEM 222 and CHEM 293. Topics in this course include a mechanistic survey of reactions of major synthetic utility, the determination of reaction mechanisms, and the importance of reactive intermediates including carbocations, carbanions, radicals, and carbenes. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 325 "Organic Chemistry IV: Organic Structure and Stereochemistry" "Prerequisite: Students must have completed a minimum of 15 credits in chemistry including CHEM 222 and CHEM 293. This course focuses on organic structure and stereochemistry including the relationship of stereochemistry to physical properties and chemical reactivity, and the determination of organic structure and stereochemistry by chemical and spectroscopic means. The concept of molecular symmetry is also introduced. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 326 "Natural Products" "Prerequisite: CHEM 324. The structures, mechanisms of action, and biosynthetic origins ofbiologically important compounds such as fatty acids, polyketides, terpenes, steroids, alkaloids, and betalactam antibiotics are discussed. The role of traditional organic chemistry in the development of modern biochemistry and biotechnology is illustrated with examples from medicine and agriculture. Lectures only."
CHEM 327 "Organic Chemistry of Polymers" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222. Introduction to the fundamental aspects of polymers and polymerization. Methods of preparation, reaction mechanisms and kinetics of polymer synthesis including condensation polymerization; addition polymerization: free radical, anionic, cationic; heterogeneous (ZieglerNatta) and homogeneous (metallocenes) coordination polymerization. Polymer characterization and uses. Lectures and problem sessions."
CHEM 333 "Introduction to Quantum Theory" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 241. The course introduces students to the concept of quantum mechanics and the electronic structure of atoms and molecules. Topics include the origins and postulates of quantum theory, the Schrdinger equation and applications to simple systems such as the harmonic oscillator, rigid rotor and the hydrogen atom. The course looks at the quantum mechanical treatment of the chemical bond and provides an introduction to spectroscopy. Lectures only."
CHEM 335 "Biophysical Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, 271, 293. This course examines the physical basis for the structures of biomolecules (energetics of protein folding), the organization and structures of biomembranes and biologically relevant systems, and intermolecular interactions (e.g. ligand binding). Both fundamental theory and techniques used to characterize these physical properties are covered. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 341 "Inorganic Chemistry III: The Transition Metals" "Prerequisite: CHEM 217, 218, 241, 242. Theories of bonding in transition metal complexes, including ligand field theory, applied to structure, physical properties, and reactivity of transition metal complexes: organometallic chemistry and catalysis. Metals in biological systems. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 375 "Biochemistry II" "Prerequisite: CHEM 221, 222, 271. A survey of selected pathways in intermediary metabolism, including their regulation and physiological significance, lipid, amino acid and nucleoside metabolism, cholesterol biosynthesis, urea cycle and the biochemistry of protein synthesis. Lectures and laboratory."
CHEM 398 "Selected Topics in Chemistry" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
CHEM 415 "Analytical Separations" "Prerequisite: CHEM 218, 312. High performance liquid separations on an analytical (nonpreparative) scale are surveyed. Fundamental separation mechanisms and application of the techniques are discussed. Emphasis is placed on separations of biologically relevant analytes which include peptides, proteins and nucleic acids. Lectures only."
CHEM 419 "Independent Study and Practicum" "Prerequisite: Must have completed 60 credits including the 45credit Core program, or equivalent, with a GPA of 2.00 (C) or better in Core program courses. In collaboration with and under the direction of a member of Faculty, the student carries out independent study and practical work on a problem chosen from the students area of concentration. The student presents his or her work to the Department in the form of a scientific poster and submits a written report to the supervisor."
CHEM 421 "Physical Organic Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235; CHEM324 or 325. Determination of organic reaction mechanisms using kinetics, activation parameters, acidbase catalysis, Bronsted catalysis law, solvent effects, medium effects, isotope effects, substitutent effects, andlinear free energy relationships. Lectures only."
CHEM 424 "Organic Synthesis" "Prerequisite: CHEM 324; 30 credits in chemistry or permission of the Department. This course is designed to introduce students to advanced methods in organic molecule synthesis. It includes an introduction to retrosynthetic analysis, a survey of some important classes of reactions, with particular emphasis on mechanistic understanding and rationale for observed selectivity when appropriate. The strategic use of specific reactions in complex molecule synthesis is highlighted."
CHEM 425 "Nucleic Acid Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 271. This course introduces students to various topics in nucleic acid chemistry. The topics include nomenclature, structure and function of RNA and DNA; techniques and methods to investigate nucleic acid structure; DNA damage and repair; interaction of small molecules and proteins with nucleic acid; oligonucleotidebased therapeutics (antisense, antigene, RNAi); synthesis of purines, pyrimidines and nucleosides; and solidphase oligonucleotide synthesis. Lectures only."
CHEM 426 "Reactive Intermediates" "Prerequisite: CHEM293 previously or concurrently. This course offers an introduction to reactive intermediates with an emphasis on structure and stability as found in modern (physical) organic chemistry. While the focus is on radicals and carbenes, carbocations are discussed near the end of the term. The material covered is relevant to chemistry and biochemistry. Lectures only."
CHEM 427 "Polymer Chemistry and Nanotechnology" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222 or permission of the Department. This course introduces some basic aspects of polymer chemistry with anemphasis on polymer synthesis. Various methods are discussed, including classical step growth, free radical, and ring opening polymerization; and other more recent methods such as living anionic, living cationic, and living controlled/radical polymerization. Additionally, the design and development of functional polymers as building blocks to develop nanomaterials for biorelated applications, particularly drug delivery applications, are presented. Other topics may include amphiphilic block copolymers, selfassembly, micellar nanocarriers, cellular imaging, multifunctional drug delivery, crosslinked nanogels/hydrogels, materials science, and biomedical engineering. Lectures only."
CHEM 431 "Computational Chemistry for Chemists and Biochemists" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 241, 333 or 335, or permission of the Department. This course presents the concepts, tools, and techniques of modern computational chemistry, and provides a very broad overview of the various fields of application across chemistry and biochemistry. The course is divided into two parts: 1) "
CHEM 435 "Interfacial Phenomena" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235. This course examines the physical chemistry of interfaces including surface and interfacial tensions, the absorption of surface active substances/surface excess properties, and surfactant selfassembly. Topics covered may include Gibbs and Langmuir monolayers, micelle formation, emulsions, foams, surfactant liquid crystals, layerbylayer polymer selfassembly, and biological membranes. Techniques for characterization and applications (biological and industrial) ofthese systems are addressed. Lectures only."
CHEM 436 "Molecular Modelling of Proteins " "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 271. This course offers a handson introduction to the computer tools used to predict the structure of a protein from its amino acid sequence, and to gain insight into its function. Students learn modelling techniques such as sequence alignment, homology modelling, computer visualization, molecular dynamics, and molecular docking. Computer laboratory with prelab lectures."
CHEM 443 "Organometallic Chemistry " "Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 341, or equivalent. This course covers the structure and properties of organometallic compounds, their main reactions and their application in catalysis and organic chemistry. Lectures only."
CHEM 450 "Research Project and Thesis" "Prerequisite: 60 credits including the 45credit Core program, or equivalent and enrolment in Honours in Chemistry; or Biochemistry, with a program GPA of 3.3 or better; or written permission of the Department. The student works on a research project in the students area of concentration, selected in consultation with and conducted under the supervision of a faculty member of the Department. The student writes a thesis on the results and defends it before a departmental committee."
CHEM 451 "Nanochemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 217, 218, 221, 222, 234, 235, 241. This modular course covers the areas of production, characterization and applications of nanoscale structures and materials. Each module is taught by a different professor as well as guest lecturers. Topics may include (but are not limited to) size dependent properties, synthesis of organic and inorganic nanostructures, selfassembled structures, chemical patterning and functional nanopatterns, biomaterials. Nanometer scale fabrication techniques such as lithographic methods, nanostamping and patterned selfassembly are discussed. Modern analysis techniques such as atomic force microscopy and electron microscopy, which are used to map and measure at the single molecule level, are introduced. Applications such as photonics, optical properties, biodetection and biosensors, micro and nanofluidics, nanoelectronics and nanomachines are presented. The course includes a term project carried out using the nanoscience facilities held in the Department research labs."
CHEM 458 "Aquatic Biogeochemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 217, 218, 312. The major aim of this course is to present a quantitative treatment of the variables that determine the composition of natural waters. Chemical equilibrium is the central theme of the course, but consideration is also given to kinetics, steadystate and dynamic models. Related themes include global chemical cycles, air and water pollution, as well as current research topics in water chemistry and chemical oceanography. Lectures only."
CHEM 470 "Environmental Biochemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375; BIOL 367; or permission of the Department. This course examines the biochemical effects of environmental stresses on organisms, and adaptations that allow organisms to face these stresses. Emphasis is placed on biochemical responses to toxic compounds such as aromatics, halogenated aliphatics, drugs, and heavy metals. Other topics may include adaptations to stresses such as temperature extremes, pathogens, and ionizing radiation. Applications to related biotechnological processes are also considered."
CHEM 471 "Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism" "Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375. Steadystate kinetics, including the use of initial velocity studies and product inhibition to establish akinetic mechanism; nonsteadystate kinetics, isotope effects, energy of activation, detailed mechanisms of selected enzymes. Lectures only."
CHEM 472 "Chemical Toxicology" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 271. Introduction to the general principles of toxicology with emphasis on the toxic effects of chemicals in humans. Doseresponse relationship, types and routes of exposure, absorption and disposition of toxic substances, toxicokinetics, types of toxic response, and factors affecting toxic response. Toxicity testing, risk assessment, and interpretation of toxicological data. Lectures only."
CHEM 473 "ProteinProtein Interactions" "Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375; or permission of the Department. This course provides an advanced examination of current topics in research related to understanding proteinprotein interactions in vitro and in vivo. Topics may include biological roles of proteinprotein interactions; evolution of proteinprotein interactions and correlated mutations; stable vs. transient interactions and their biological significance; interactomics; structural characteristics of proteinprotein interaction interfaces; targeted disruption of proteinprotein interactions and drug design; experimental approaches to measuring proteinprotein interactions."
CHEM 475 "Protein Engineering and Design" "Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375 or permission of the Department. This course examines the principles behind protein design, how techniques of protein engineering are used, and the methods used to assess protein properties. Examples include studies of protein stability, structurefunction relationships, and applications to drug design. Lectures only."
CHEM 476 "Structure and Function of Biomembranes " "Prerequisite: BIOL 266; CHEM 375 or permission of the Department. This course discusses what is known about how the membranes of biological organisms are assembled and the roles that these membranes play in a number of important processes. Emphasis is placed on the transport of proteins to and through biomembranes and the roles that membranes play in metabolite and ion transport. Where applicable, the significance of these processes is illustrated by examining the roles of membranes in health and disease. Lectures only."
CHEM 477 "Advanced Laboratory in Biochemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375. Theory and practice of techniques in enzymology and protein chemistry, including steadystate andstoppedflow enzyme kinetics, ligand binding, immunological techniques, proteomics, computer modelling, and chemical modification of proteins. Tutorials and laboratory."
CHEM 478 "Hormone Biochemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375. This course deals with an indepth study of the vertebrate hormones and involves a study of the precise chemical structure and properties of each hormone, its biosynthesis and mode of secretion from the cell. The circulating form of the hormone is examined, as well as the nature of the hormone receptor. The cellular mechanism of action and the relationship of the hormones action to the intact animal are investigated. Lectures only."
CHEM 481 "Bioinorganic Chemistry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 241. Role of metals in biochemical systems. Essential trace elements, zinc enzymes, oxygen transport and storage, metalloproteins and biological electron transfer, structurefunction relationships in heme enzymes, nitrogen fixation; model compounds for metalloproteins and metalloenzymes. Lectures only."
CHEM 493 "Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy" "Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 293. This course is designed to provide the background in magnetic resonance theory necessary to understand modern highresolution NMR experiments and instrumentation. The basic theory in the introductory section also applies to electron spin resonance (ESR). Relaxation and throughbond and throughspace interactions, and experiments to investigate themare considered. Spinmanipulations and behaviour in multiplepulse, Fourier transform NMR techniques used forcommon spectral editing and twodimensional experiments are discussed. Lectures only."
CHEM 494 "Mass Spectrometry" "Prerequisite: CHEM 218, 222, 271. Production and interpretation of mass spectra. Topics include ionization methods (electron impact, chemical ionization and fastatom bombardment); interpretation of mass spectra; introduction to quantitative analysis by mass spectrometry. Lectures only."
CHEM 495 "Modern Spectroscopy" "Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 241, 333. This course demonstrates how quantum theory applies to the measurement of absorption and emission spectra of atoms and molecules. The course examines rotational, vibrational, and electronic spectroscopy. Photoelectron and related spectroscopies. Lasers and laser spectroscopy. Lectures only."
CHEM 498 "Advanced Topics in Chemistry" ""
CHEM 499 "Advanced Topics in Chemistry" ""
CLAS 201 "Introductory Ancient Greek I" "This course presents students with the introductory elements of ancient Greek grammar, syntax, and vocabulary."
CLAS 202 "Introductory Ancient Greek II" "Prerequisite: CLAS 201. This course continues the study of Greek grammar, syntax, and vocabulary, and prepares students to begin reading ancient texts."
CLAS 203 "Introductory Latin I" "This course presents students with the introductory elements of Classical Latin grammar, syntax, and vocabulary."
CLAS 204 "Introductory Latin II" "Prerequisite: CLAS 203. This course continues the study of Classical Latin grammar, syntax, and vocabulary, and prepares students to begin reading ancient texts."
CLAS 210 "Classical Civilization" "This course provides a comprehensive introduction to the civilizations of Ancient Greece and Rome, focusing on history, archaeology, literature and thought from the Late Bronze Age through to the decline of the Roman Empire."
CLAS 211 "Greek Literature" "An introduction to the literature of ancient Greece, this course focuses on Homer and the epic cycle, the Homeric hymns, Hesiod and lyric poetry, tragedy and comedy. The texts are read in English translation."
CLAS 212 "Roman Literature" "An introduction to the major authors of the Roman world, this course focuses on Catullus, Virgil, Horace, Ovid and Lucretius; works of the dramatists, orators and satirists may also be included. The texts are read in English translation."
CLAS 220 "Daily Life in Ancient Greece and Rome" "This course explores the lifestyles, customs, and daily practices of people in Ancient Greece and Rome through archaeological, historical, and literary sources."
CLAS 230 "(also listed as HIST 219)" " Ancient Near East"
CLAS 240 "(also listed as HIST 223)" " Greek History from the Bronze Age to Alexander"
CLAS 242 "(also listed as HIST 225)" " History of the Roman Republic"
CLAS 260 "Introduction to Greek Archaeology" "This course provides a general overview of the material remains of ancient Greece from the Bronze Age to the Hellenistic period. It addresses the function, context, dating, and meaning of artifacts, as well as methods of analysis."
CLAS 264 "Egyptian Archaeology" "This course examines the principal monuments of Egypt from the predynastic through the Pharaonic period, ending with the Roman conquest of Egypt. Aspects considered may include the pyramids and tombs, paintings, writing systems, and archaeological evidence of Egyptian contributions to science, navigation, religion, and culture."
CLAS 265 "Mythologies of the Ancient Mediterranean" "This course provides a survey of the myths of the ancient Mediterranean. The focus is on Greek and Roman mythology, with attention also given to the mythologies of the Ancient Near East."
CLAS 267 "The Archaeology of the Greek Bronze Age" "The Bronze Age in Mainland Greece, Crete, and the Greek Islands."
CLAS 280 "Introductory Ancient Greek: Intensive Course" "Greek grammar, syntax, and vocabulary are presented in an intensive one-term course that enables students to begin reading ancient texts."
CLAS 290 "Introductory Latin: Intensive Course" "Latin grammar, syntax, and vocabulary are presented in an intensive one-term course that enables students to begin reading ancient texts."
CLAS 298 "Selected Topics in Classics" ""
CLAS 299 "Selected Topics in Classics" ""
CLAS 321 "Greek Epic Poetry" "Prerequisite: CLAS 211. This course provides an in-depth study of Greek epic poetry from the Archaic through to the Hellenistic period. The primary focus is on early Hexameter poetry (Homer, Hesiod, and the Homeric Hymns), as well as the development of the genre in the Hellenistic period as represented by Callimachus and Apollonius of Rhodes. The texts are read in English translation."
CLAS 322 "Latin Literature of the Augustan Period" "Prerequisite: CLAS 212. This course provides an in-depth study of the Golden Age of Latin poetry in the period of transition from Republic to Empire. Authors studied include Virgil, Horace, Propertius, and Ovid. The texts are read in English translation."
CLAS 330 "Greek Drama" "Prerequisite: CLAS 211. Designed as an introduction to Greek drama from the origins of tragedy in the sixth century to New Comedy, this course consists of a detailed study of selected plays of Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes and Menander. Also considered are Aristotles "
CLAS 341 "(also listed as HIST 323)" " Greek History from Alexander to the Roman Conquest"
CLAS 343 "(also listed as HIST 327)" " History of the Roman Empire"
CLAS 353 "Representations of Women in Ancient Greece and Rome" "The ancient Greek and Roman representations of women are examined within their historical and cultural contexts. Focus is placed on the changing social roles, status and images of women in antiquity. Both visual and literary sources are used."
CLAS 363 "Archaeology of Archaic Greece" "Prerequisite: CLAS 260. This course explores the cultural developments of the period (ca. 650 to 450 BCE) through its material remains."
CLAS 364 "Classical Greek Art and Archaeology" "Prerequisite: CLAS 260. An exploration of the monuments and artifacts of Classical Greece, ca. 480 to 380 BCE, this course concentrates on architecture, sculpture, vase painting, artistic production and methods of interpretation."
CLAS 365 "Art and Archaeology of the Hellenistic Age" "Prerequisite: CLAS 260. An investigation of the art and archaeology of the Hellenistic age from the death of Alexander in 323 to the mid-first century BCE, this course examines architecture, sculpture, mosaics, wall painting and the minor arts; emphasis is on the Roman influence on Greek art of the period."
CLAS 369 "Roman Art and Archaeology" "An introduction to the artifacts and monuments of Roman civilization from the sixth century BC through the Empire (third century AD), this course examines artistic styles, techniques, function, iconography and interpretation."
CLAS 370 "Practicum in Archaeology" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course is designed to give the student on-site fieldwork experience in either survey or excavation work. At least one month in the field is required."
CLAS 383 "Intermediate Ancient Greek I: Prose" "Prerequisite: CLAS 202 or 280. In this course, students read prose works of authors such as Herodotus, Xenophon and Plato in the original Greek texts. Special attention is given to grammatical and syntactical structures of the language."
CLAS 384 "Intermediate Ancient Greek II: Poetry" "Prerequisite: CLAS 383. In this course, students read selected works of the ancient poets in the original Greek texts, with an emphasis on Homer and Euripides. Special attention is given to grammatical and syntactical structures of the language."
CLAS 391 "Intermediate Latin I: Prose" "Prerequisite: CLAS 204 or 290. Prose works of authors such as Caesar, Cornelius Nepos, Cicero and Pliny are read in the original Latin texts. Attention is given to further study of grammatical and syntactical structures of the language."
CLAS 392 "Intermediate Latin II: Poetry" "Prerequisite: CLAS 391. Selected works of the Roman poets are read in the original Latin texts, with emphasis on Catullus, Ovid, Martial and Petronius. Attention is given to further study of grammatical and syntactical structures of the language."
CLAS 398 "Selected Topics in Classics" ""
CLAS 399 "Selected Topics in Classics" ""
CLAS 410 "Advanced Ancient Greek I: Prose" "Prerequisite: CLAS 384. Works of the Greek historians, philosophers and orators are studied in depth in the original Greek texts. While authors read vary from year to year, the primary focus is on Herodotus, Thucydides, Plato or Demosthenes. Advanced issues of grammar and syntax in addition to textual constitution, as well as broader issues of historical and literary importance, are discussed."
CLAS 411 "Advanced Ancient Greek II: Poetry" "Prerequisite: CLAS 410. Works of Greek epic, lyric or dramatic poetry are studied in depth in the original Greek texts. While authors read vary from year to year, the primary focus is on Homer, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides or Pindar. Advanced issues of grammar and syntax in addition to textual constitution, as well as broader issues of historical and literary importance, are discussed."
CLAS 420 "Advanced Latin I: Prose" "Prerequisite: CLAS 392. Works of the Roman historians, philosophers and orators are studied in depth in the original Latin texts. While authors read vary from year to year, the primary focus is on Cicero, Sallust, Livy or Tacitus. Advanced issues of grammar and syntax in addition to textual constitution, as well as broader issues of historical and literary importance, are discussed."
CLAS 421 "Advanced Latin II: Poetry" "Prerequisite: CLAS 420. Works of the Roman poets are studied in depth in the original Latin texts. While authors read vary from year to year, the primary focus is on Virgil, Ovid, Horace, Juvenal or Lucretius. Advanced issues of grammar and syntax in addition to textual constitution, as well as broader issues of historical and literary importance, are discussed."
CLAS 460 "Ancient Pottery: History, Analysis, and Interpretation " "Prerequisite: CLAS 260 and completion of 6 credits at the 300-level in Archaeology. This course introduces students to the most common archaeological artifact, pottery. It addresses the technology and history of Greek and Roman ceramic wares, and uses a hands-on approach to instruct students in strategies for extracting information from pottery sherds."
CLAS 480 "Tutorial" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course provides students with the opportunity to study a topic of individual interest under the guidance of a faculty member."
CLAS 490 "Honours Thesis" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. The student works with an individual faculty member in a particular area of archaeology, history or philology to produce an extensive research paper."
CLAS 498 "Advanced Topics in Classics" ""
CLAS 499 "Advanced Topics in Classics" ""
MARA 200 "Introduction to Modern Standard Arabic I" "This course provides an intensive introduction to the basic elements of Modern Standard Arabic for the student with no knowledge of the language. Instruction addresses all the language competencies of Modern Standard Arabic."
MARA 203 "Modern Standard Arabic for Heritage Speakers I" "This course provides an introduction to the basic elements of Modern Standard Arabic for students with basic or limited knowledge of the language. It is designed for heritage speakers with no reading and writing skills in Modern Standard Arabic but with knowledge of dialect vocabulary and oral skills. The course is also for non-heritage students who know the Arabic script but have never studied the Arabic language."
MARA 206 "Introduction to Modern Standard Arabic II" "Prerequisite: MARA 200 or 203 or equivalent. This course continues the introduction to the basic elements of Modern Standard Arabic. Students practise conversation skills on basic general topics."
MARA 207 "Modern Standard Arabic for Heritage Speakers II" "Prerequisite: MARA 203 or permission of the Department. This course continues the introduction to the basic elements of Modern Standard Arabic. Students practise conversation skills through basic general topics. This course is designed for Arabic heritage speakers who have completed MARA 203 and/or learners who have basic introductory Arabic competence."
MARA 240 "Intermediate Modern Standard Arabic I" "Prerequisite: MARA 206 or 207 or equivalent. This course provides a review of the basic elements of Modern Standard Arabic and continues to develop the four language skills within their cultural context. Students prepare brief essays and oral presentations."
MARA 250 "Intermediate Modern Standard Arabic II" "Prerequisite: MARA 240 or equivalent. This course is a continuation of MARA 240. It prepares intermediate language students in diverse aspects of reading, writing, and conversation. In addition to improving listening comprehension and speaking skills, this course places increased emphasis on reading and writing."
MARA 301 "Advanced Arabic " "Prerequisite: MARA 250 or equivalent. This course builds upon the students foundation in the Arabic language. Students learn new grammatical structures and expand their vocabulary, while reviewing the grammatical structures acquired previously. Instruction builds particularly on the students ability to respond to the works studied with advanced writing and oral strategies."
MARA 308 "Arabic for Business " "Prerequisite: MARA 250 previously or concurrently. This course is designed to give intermediate and advanced students a solid foundation in business vocabulary, correspondence, and basic business practices, as well as the cultural concepts necessary to enable them to express themselves in the Arabic-speaking business world."
MARA 310 "Introduction to the Literature of the Arab World" "This course provides an introduction to the works of some of the major writers of contemporary Arabic culture. The course is taught in English and readings are in English translation."
MARA 320 "Modern Arabic Fiction" "This course examines key developments in Arabic fiction related to the contemporary Arabic-speaking world with the aim of highlighting the distinctive texture of its experiences and identities. The chosen texts cover a wide range of topics and convey the complex and rich cultural diversity of the Arab World. The course is taught in English and knowledge of Arabic is not required."
MARA 365 "Culture and Civilization of the Arab World: The Golden Age" "This course provides an overview of the cultural history of the Arab world with an emphasis on the Golden Age (eighth to 13th century). Special attention is given to some topics at the core of this period, namely the intellectual dynamics, sciences and arts. The Arab civilization is put into the political, social and religious contexts that allowed it to emerge and flourish. This course is taught in English and no prior knowledge of Arabic is required."
MARA 367 "Culture and Civilization of the Arab World: The Modern Age" "This course presents a comprehensive survey of modern Arab culture, from the Nahda or Revival of the late-19th and early-20th to the 21st century. It discusses issues necessary to understand the modern Arab world including media and cinema, art, architecture, folklore, and food. The roles played by various minorities and the Arab youth are also studied. This course is taught in English and no knowledge of Arabic is required."
MARA 398 "Special Topics in Arabic Language and Culture" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
MARA 450 "Arabic Women Writers" "This course presents a detailed analysis of a selection of works of modern fiction, non-fiction, and poetry by female Arab writers. It explores modern Arabic womens writing in relation to Arabic literary criticism and feminist theory. The majority of the course is devoted to analyzing texts originally written in Arabic but significant works by Arab women written in French and English are also discussed. This course is taught in English and no prior knowledge of Arabic is required. Advanced-level students  i.e. students placed at the 250 level or higher in Arabic language courses  must do the readings and/or submit their work in Arabic."
MARA 480 "Tutorial" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course provides students with the opportunity to study a topic of individual interest under the guidance of a faculty member."
MCHI 200 "Introduction to Modern Chinese I" "This course provides an intensive introduction to the basic elements of Chinese for the student with no knowledge of the language. Emphasis is on basic grammatical concepts, listening comprehension, and sound reproduction. Approximately 300 characters are studied."
MCHI 206 "Introduction to Modern Chinese II" "Prerequisite: MCHI 200. This course continues the introduction to the basic elements of Chinese, adding approximately 300 further characters."
MCHI 240 "Intermediate Modern Chinese I" "Prerequisite: MCHI 206 or equivalent. The aim of this course is to consolidate the knowledge acquired in MCHI 200 and 206 and pursue communication skills on basic general topics in all competencies of the language, adding approximately 300 further characters."
MCHI 250 "Intermediate Modern Chinese II" "Prerequisite: MCHI 240 or equivalent. This course is a continuation of MCHI 240. It prepares intermediate language students in diverse aspects of reading, writing, and conversation. In addition to improving listening comprehension and speaking skills, this course places increased emphasis on reading and writing."
MCHI 306 "Introduction to Translation" "Prerequisite: MCHI 240. The emphasis of this course is placed on advanced grammar for the purposes of writing and translation."
MCHI 308 "Chinese for Business" "Prerequisite: MCHI 240. This course provides students with marketable skills including linguistic competence, cross-cultural proficiency, and knowledge about business in China across a variety of fields."
MCHI 310 "Introduction to Modern Chinese Literature" "This course provides an introduction to the works of some of the major writers of contemporary Chinese culture. The course is taught in English and reading materials are in English translation."
MCHI 311 "Classical Chinese Literature" "Taught in English, this course introduces classical Chinese literature from 1500 BCE to the end of the 19th century in its historical and cultural setting. Covering the four major literary genres of poetry, prose, drama and fiction, students learn both key Chinese aesthetic concepts and Western critical theory, with a view to encouraging cross- and intercultural interpretations. Major works are read in English translation."
MCHI 365 "Introduction to Chinese Cultural Traditions" "This course is an introduction to the formation and traditions of Chinese culture. Topics may include Confucian and Taoist philosophy, literature, and the arts. This course is taught in English."
MCHI 366 "Chinese Visual Culture " "Taught in English, this course introduces students to the traditions and achievements of Chinese visual culture. Employing contemporary critical approaches, students explore both mass and high cultures, with a primary focus on the development of Chinese painting from the 10th century to the present, with an emphasis on the interpretation of images."
MCHI 398 "Special Topics in Chinese Language and Culture" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
MCHI 399 "Special Topics in Chinese Language and Culture" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
MCHI 480 "Tutorial" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course provides students with the opportunity to study a topic of individual interest under the guidance of a faculty member."
GERM 200 "Introductory German: Intensive Course" "This course provides a comprehensive introduction to most of the basic elements of the German language for the student with no knowledge of German. Practice is provided through short readings, conversation, composition, and lab work."
GERM 201 "Introductory German I" "This course provides an introduction to the elements of the German language for the student with no knowledge of German. Practice is provided through short readings, conversation, composition, and lab work."
GERM 202 "Introductory German II" "Prerequisite: GERM 201 or equivalent. This course is a continuation of GERM 201 and completes the study of the basic elements of the German language. Practice is provided through short readings, conversation, composition, and lab work."
GERM 230 "Introduction to German Culture" "This course offers a panoramic study of the major components of the culture of German-speaking countries from the Middle Ages to contemporary times. Attention is given to these countries artistic, social, political, and economic life. This course is taught in English."
GERM 231 "German Literature in Translation" "This course focuses on reading and discussion of 20th-century literary works and films from Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. Works translated from German are used. This course is taught in English, but advanced German students are encouraged to read the texts in German."
GERM 240 "Intermediate German: Intensive Course" "Prerequisite: GERM 200 or 202. This course provides a review of German grammar in a single term and furnishes additional details not dealt with in the introductory courses. Practice is provided through readings, discussions, and composition."
GERM 241 "Intermediate German I" "Prerequisite: GERM 200 or 202. This course provides a review of German grammar and deals with additional details not covered in the introductory courses. Practice is provided through short readings, discussions, and composition."
GERM 242 "Intermediate German II" "Prerequisite: GERM 241 or equivalent. This course is a continuation of GERM 241. It completes the review of the grammar and includes additional details not covered in the introductory courses. Practice is provided through short readings, discussions, and composition."
GERM 260 "German for Reading Knowledge" "This course introduces the student to reading strategies, grammar, resources, and basic vocabulary and leads to a second-year reading knowledge of German in 13 weeks. This course is taught in English."
GERM 298 "Selected Topics in German" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
GERM 301 "Advanced Grammar and Composition I" "Prerequisite: GERM 240 or 242 or permission of the Department. This course is designed to help students understand advanced aspects of German grammar and to provide practice in the correct and effective writing of German."
GERM 302 "Advanced Grammar and Composition II" "Prerequisite: GERM 301. This course continues the study of advanced aspects of German grammar and provides practice in the correct and effective writing of German by means of composition such as the summary, description, narration, argumentation, and essay."
GERM 305 "Conversational German" "Prerequisite: GERM 240 or 242 or equivalent. This course is offered to non-native speakers of German. Its main goal is for students to improve their oral proficiency in German. This course aims to increase students competence levels in listening, reading, and writing."
GERM 306 "Introduction to Translation" "Prerequisite: GERM 240 or 242. This course examines German and English grammar in a comparative context in order to provide a basis for translation between the two languages. It also aims to develop lexical and semantic knowledge of the German language through analysis of textual materials, with special focus on words and idiomatic expressions that are essential to clear and effective communication. Students translate short texts from a variety of fields, primarily from English to German."
GERM 307 "Translation Practice" "Prerequisite: GERM 306. This course continues the examination of German and English grammar in a practical context as a basis for translation between the two languages. It also enhances student lexical and semantic knowledge of the German language through direct, practical experience in translation. Students improve their vocabulary and linguistic accuracy by exploring the range of meanings associated with particular structures and idiomatic expressions. Translation is primarily from English to German."
GERM 308 "German for Business " "Prerequisite: GERM 240 or 242 or equivalent. This course provides students with marketable skills including linguistic competence, cross-cultural proficiency, and knowledge about business in Germany across a variety of fields."
GERM 310 "Introduction to Modern German Literature I" "Prerequisite: GERM 301. This course provides a general overview of the major authors and trends of German literature from 1750 to 1900 within an historical context."
GERM 311 "Introduction to Modern German Literature II" "Prerequisite: GERM 301. This course provides a general overview of the major authors and trends of German literature in the 20th century within an historical context."
GERM 361 "Topics in the Culture of German-Speaking Nations" "Prerequisite: GERM 240 or 242. Topics vary from year to year. Possible topics include German film; literature of the Counter-culture; Germany and the Holocaust; immigrant culture and its discourse; womens writing; popular culture; Medieval Germany: kings, castles, and minstrels; cultural diversity in German-speaking nations. Specific topics for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
GERM 362 "Modern Germany" "Prerequisite: GERM 240 or 242. This course gives an overview of the developments in Germany throughout the 20th century. The emphasis of the course may vary from year to year with such topics as Germany between World War I and II, the formative years after WWII and the development of East and West Germany, and the unified Germany. Materials to be studied include historical and topical documents, film, video, and web-based resources."
GERM 375 "Outreach Experience Practicum" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course is designed to give the student practical experience related to German language and culture and/or German studies. It is designed to complement the students academic program with outreach to the larger community in the form of organizing an event, working at an internship in a German cultural or educational institution of Montreal or similar. Students develop an outreach plan in consultation with the Department and produce a final report of their experience."
GERM 398 "Selected Topics in German" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
GERM 410 "Cyborgs, Robots and Automata in German Literature, Film and Video Games" "This course examines the figure of the android and explores representations of artificial beings in German literature, cinema, and video games. A focus is on issues of technology, art, gender, race, and class. Students receive insights into narrative constructions as well as ludology (including game history, design and reception) by exploring how video games challenge traditional models of understanding and approaching texts. The language of instruction is English, and no prior knowledge of the German language is required. Advanced-level students  i.e. students placed at the 300 level or higher in German language courses  must do the readings and submit their work in German."
GERM 420 "Of German Witches, Ghosts, Daemons and Vampires" "This course explores how the strange, the magical, the supernatural and the uncanny ("
GERM 440 "Dandies, Flneurs and Tricksters:" " Crossover Figures in Modernism and Pop Modernism "
GERM 450 "German Women Writers Across the Ages" "This course investigates the changing literary and social roles of German women from the 18th to the 21st century. Selected read-ings of womens literary and cultural productions will also illustrate the history of gender coding from the period of "
GERM 480 "Tutorial I" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course offers guided readings in German language and/or literature, to meet the students individual needs. At least one major written assignment is required."
GERM 481 "Tutorial II" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course offers guided readings in German language and/or literature, to meet the students individual needs. At least one major written assignment is required."
GERM 482 "Tutorial III" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course offers guided readings in German language and/or literature, to meet the students individual needs. At least one major written assignment is required."
GERM 483 "Tutorial IV" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course offers guided readings in German language and/or literature, to meet the students individual needs. At least one major written assignment is required."
GERM 490 "Honours Essay Tutorial" "Prerequisite: Honours status. This course provides the honours candidate with the opportunity to prepare an extensive research essay, on a topic to be chosen by the candidate with the approval of a supervising member of the faculty of the German section."
GERM 498 "Advanced Topics in German" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ITAL 200 "Introductory Italian: Intensive Course" "This course provides a comprehensive introduction to the Italian language, completing the fundamental aspects of grammar in one term."
ITAL 201 "Introductory Italian I" "This course provides an introduction to the basic elements of Italian for the student with no knowledge of the language."
ITAL 202 "Introductory Italian II" "Prerequisite: ITAL 201 or equivalent. The objective is to complete the study of fundamental aspects of Italian grammar."
ITAL 210 "Italian for Heritage Speakers I" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course provides an introduction to the basic elements of the Italian language and is designed for heritage speakers of Italian and/or students with some previous passive knowledge or exposure to the language, who wish to strengthen their linguistic knowledge of and skills in Italian. Emphasis is placed on grammar, reading and writing, vocabulary development, and exposure to the language and culture of Italian communities. Both oral and written expression are emphasized."
ITAL 211 "Italian for Heritage Speakers II" "Prerequisite: ITAL 210 or permission of the Department. This course is a continuation of ITAL 210 designed for heritage speakers of Italian and/or students with some previous passive knowledge or exposure to the language, who wish to strengthen their linguistic knowledge of and skills in Italian. Emphasis is placed on grammar, reading and writing, vocabulary development, and exposure to the language and culture of Italian communities. Both oral and written expression are emphasized."
ITAL 240 "Intermediate Italian: Intensive Course" "Prerequisite: ITAL 200 or 202 or 211 or equivalent. This course provides a review of Italian grammar in one term and deals with additional details not covered in the introductory course. Practice is provided through readings, discussions, and composition."
ITAL 241 "Intermediate Italian I" "Prerequisite: ITAL 200 or 202 or 211 or equivalent. This course provides a review of Italian grammar and deals with additional details not covered in the introductory courses. Practice is provided through short readings, discussions, and composition."
ITAL 242 "Intermediate Italian II" "Prerequisite: ITAL 241 or equivalent. This course is a continuation of ITAL 241. It completes the review of the grammar and provides additional details not covered in the introductory courses. Practice is provided through short readings, discussions, and composition."
ITAL 298 "Selected Topics in Italian" ""
ITAL 299 "Selected Topics in Italian" ""
ITAL 301 "Advanced Grammar and Writing I" "Prerequisite: ITAL 240 or 242 or 254 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course provides students with a thorough grounding in the essentials of Italian grammar, while revising and improving morpho-syntactic structures and syntax, as well as developing reading comprehension techniques, commentary writing skills, acquiring competence in essay writing and developing oral and aural skills. Aspects of Italian history, culture, and contemporary life are also introduced through readings, listening materials, videos and films and through the use of online technologies."
ITAL 302 "Advanced Grammar and Writing II" "Prerequisite: ITAL 301 or equivalent. This course continues to provide students with a thorough grounding in the fundamentals of Italian grammar. The course also focuses on using effective stylistic resources and formal conventions in writing, especially for essays and related texts. Aspects of Italian history, culture, and contemporary life are introduced through readings, listening materials, videos and films and through the use of online technologies."
ITAL 303 "Introduction to Academic Writing in Italian" "Prerequisite: ITAL 240 or 242 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course offers a survey of the major rhetorical devices and methodological tools for the critical reading of literary and other texts, and for the production of academic essays in Italian. The course covers basic notions of narratology and rhetoric, as well as discourse analysis and critical thinking. Activities include close reading of texts and practical work in research and documentation, as well as the presentation of well-organized, analytical prose."
ITAL 305 "Communicative Strategies and Oral Communication" "Prerequisite: ITAL 240 or 242 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. The main goal of this course is to improve students oral communication in Italian. The course also develops other language skills: listening, reading, and to some extent, writing."
ITAL 306 "Introduction to Translation" "Prerequisite: ITAL 240 or 242 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course examines Italian and English grammar in a comparative context to provide a sound basis for translation between the two languages. It also aims to develop lexical and semantic knowledge of the Italian language through analysis of textual materials. Students translate short texts from a variety of fields such as literature, business, journalism, politics, and science. Translation is primarily from English to Italian."
ITAL 307 "Translation Practice" "Prerequisite: ITAL 306 or equivalent. This course is a continuation of ITAL 306. It deals with advanced problems and techniques of translation from Italian and into Italian."
ITAL 308 "Italian for Business" "Prerequisite: ITAL 240 or 242 or 254 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course is designed to give intermediate-advanced level students a solid foundation in business vocabulary, correspondence, and basic business practices, as well as the cultural concepts necessary to enable them to express themselves in the Italian-speaking business world."
ITAL 310 "Survey of Italian Literature I" "Prerequisite: ITAL 240 or 242 or 254 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course examines the major authors and trends of Italian literature from its origins to the end of the 16th century."
ITAL 311 "Survey of Italian Literature II" "Prerequisite: ITAL 240 or 242 or 254 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course examines the major authors and trends of Italian literature from the beginning of the 17th century to the present."
ITAL 351 "Dramatic Representations in Italian Cinema and Culture" "This course offers students the opportunity to understand contemporary Italian society through the works of filmmakers who examine the cultural, political and working environments of present-day Italy. The films are grouped thematically, covering politics, media, social changes, organized crime, terrorism, the workplace and the new challenges facing the younger generation of Italians. The language of instruction is English, and no prior knowledge of the Italian language is required. Advanced level students  i.e. students placed at the 300 level or higher in Italian  must hand in all their work in Italian."
ITAL 361 "Italy and Its Languages" "This course provides an overview of the linguistic situation in present-day Italy, with attention to the structure of the Italian language and its dialects; regional, social, and communicative variations; linguistic minorities in Italy, and linguistic legislation in Italy. The language of instruction is English, and no prior knowledge of the Italian language is required. Advanced level students  i.e. students placed at the 300 level or higher in Italian  must hand in all their work in Italian."
ITAL 365 "Italian Civilization: Italy from Dante to Today " "Prerequisite: ITAL 240 or 242 with a grade of C or higher. This course aims at familiarizing students with the crucial moments of Italian history and the major issues characterizing Italian culture. The selected topics/artists/authors offer a unique opportunity to analyze and discuss issues related to the historical, political, and socio-cultural evolution of Italy from the Middle Ages to the present day."
ITAL 367 "Cultural Views of Italy" "This course focuses on politics, literature, and the arts in Italy from Dante and the Italian Renaissance to the present. The language of instruction is English, and no prior knowledge of the Italian language is required. Advanced-level students  i.e. students placed at the 300 level or higher in Italian language courses  must submit their work in Italian."
ITAL 398 "Selected Topics in Italian" ""
ITAL 399 "Selected Topics in Italian" ""
ITAL 415 "Dante and the Middle Ages" "Prerequisite: ITAL 301. This course examines a selection of the works of Dante Alighieri and his contribution to the formation of the Italian language, literature and culture. It offers an introduction to Medieval literature and culture (including its historical, social and political context) by analyzing passages from the "
ITAL 422 "Petrarch and Boccaccio" "Prerequisite: ITAL 301 or equivalent. This course examines the origin and evolution of the early Italian novella. Petrarch and Boccaccio are studied as forerunners of humanism; emphasis is placed on Petrarchs "
ITAL 427 "Italian Humanism and the Renaissance" "Prerequisite: ITAL 301 or equivalent. This course deals with the rise of humanism and analyzes the Renaissance as a historical and cultural concept. References are made to the social, historical, and artistic trends in 15th- and early-16th-century Italy. Emphasis is on representative works of Alberti, Valla, Leonardo da Vinci, Pico della Mirandola and Machiavelli."
ITAL 434 "The Epic Tradition in Italy" "Prerequisite: ITAL 301 or equivalent. This course explores the nature and evolution of the chivalresque genre in Italy, mainly within the context of the 15th and 16th centuries, and with special emphasis on Ariosto and Tasso."
ITAL 439 "Romanticism in Italy" "Prerequisite: ITAL 301 or equivalent. This course examines the concept of Romanticism in Italy and its relation to Risorgimento. Emphasis is on representative works of Foscolo, Manzoni, and Leopardi. References are made to the role of leading political figures of the period."
ITAL 446 "Cultural Expressions in Italy from Neo-Realism to the Present" "Prerequisite: ITAL 301 or equivalent. This course examines the debate on Neo-realism and looks at literary and cinematographic expressions. It also deals with the "
ITAL 450 "Feminist Discourse in Italy" "Prerequisite: ITAL 301 or equivalent. This course studies the question of gender as a concept and traces its presence within the Italian cultural tradition from the Renaissance to the present. Representative works of figures such as Franco, Marinelli, de Fonseca Pimentel, Deledda, Aleramo, and Maraini are studied."
ITAL 452 "The Contemporary Italian Novel" "Prerequisite: ITAL 301. This course offers a survey of the contemporary Italian novel, from the end of the 1980s to the present, while introducing the socio-historical context in which different trends arise and develop. Authors are chosen to provide significant examples of the main trends in Italian fiction writing."
ITAL 461 "History of the Italian Language" "Prerequisite: ITAL 301. This course examines the social, cultural and linguistic changes from the formation of the Italian vernaculars to the present day. This course also studies the most representative texts illustrating different medieval, Renaissance, and modern theories on the Italian language (Dante, Pietro Bembo, Alessandro Manzoni, and Pier Paolo Pasolini, for example)."
ITAL 463 "Language, Politics and Ideology" "Prerequisite: ITAL 301. This course examines the ideological and political appropriations of Italian as it developed into a standard and unified language from Dante to the present. It explores what motivated political powers to promote a specific type of language or a specific canon of Italian authors. Through a series of thematically arranged case studies, students are encouraged to reflect on the importance of language to understand social and cultural changes in Italy. Course topics may include language and cultural identity, language and politics, and language and gender."
ITAL 480 "Tutorial I" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course consists of guided readings in Italian language and/or literature, and is designed to meet the individual needs of advanced students. Assignments include written and oral criticism of the works studied."
ITAL 481 "Tutorial II" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course consists of guided readings in Italian language and/or literature, and is designed to meet the individual needs of advanced students. Assignments include written and oral criticism of the works studied."
ITAL 482 "Tutorial III" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course consists of guided readings in Italian language and/or literature, and is designed to meet the individual needs of advanced students. Assignments include written and oral criticism of the works studied."
ITAL 483 "Tutorial IV" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course consists of guided readings in Italian language and/or literature, and is designed to meet the individual needs of advanced students. Assignments include written and oral criticism of the works studied."
ITAL 490 "Honours Essay Tutorial" "Prerequisite: Honours status. This course provides the honours candidate with the opportunity to prepare an extensive research essay, on a topic to be chosen by the candidate with the approval of a supervising member of the faculty of the Italian section."
ITAL 498 "Advanced Topics in Italian" ""
ITAL 499 "Advanced Topics in Italian" ""
SPAN 200 "Introductory Spanish: Intensive Course" "This course provides a comprehensive introduction to the Spanish language, completing the fundamental aspects of grammar in one term."
SPAN 201 "Introductory Spanish I" "This course provides an introduction to the basic elements of Spanish for the student with no knowledge of the language."
SPAN 202 "Introductory Spanish II" "Prerequisite: SPAN 201 or equivalent. The objective of this course is to complete the study of fundamental aspects of Spanish grammar."
SPAN 240 "Intermediate Spanish: Intensive Course" "Prerequisite: SPAN 200 or 202 or equivalent. This course provides a review of Spanish grammar in a single term and furnishes additional details not dealt with in the introductory courses. Practice is provided through readings, discussions, and composition."
SPAN 241 "Intermediate Spanish I" "Prerequisite: SPAN 200 or 202 or equivalent. This course provides a review of Spanish grammar and deals with additional details not covered in the introductory courses. Practice is provided through short readings, discussions, and composition."
SPAN 242 "Intermediate Spanish II" "Prerequisite: SPAN 241 or equivalent. This course is a continuation of SPAN 241. It completes the review of the grammar and includes additional details not covered in the introductory courses. Practice is provided through short readings, discussions, and composition."
SPAN 298 "Special Topics in Spanish" ""
SPAN 299 "Special Topics in Spanish" ""
SPAN 301 "Grammar and the Process of Writing I" "Prerequisite: SPAN 240 or 242 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course offers a practical analysis of the conventions that govern grammar, spelling, punctuation, and syntax in Peninsular and Latin-American Spanish. It also focuses on the means of identifying, analyzing, and using effective stylistic resources in different forms of writing such as summaries, notes, journals, and short stories."
SPAN 302 "Grammar and the Process of Writing II" "Prerequisite: SPAN 301 or equivalent. This course continues the practical analysis of grammar and focuses on using effective stylistic resources and formal conventions in writing, especially for essays and related texts."
SPAN 303 "Critical Reading of Hispanic Texts" "Prerequisite: SPAN 301. This course offers a survey of the major rhetorical devices and methodological tools for the critical reading of literary and other texts, and for the production of well-founded and persuasive writing in Spanish. The course covers notions of narratology and poetics, as well as discourse analysis and critical thinking. Activities include close reading of Hispanic texts and practical work in research and documentation, as well as the presentation of well-organized, analytical prose."
SPAN 305 "Communicative Strategies and Oral Communication for Non-Native Speakers" "Prerequisite: SPAN 240 or 242 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course is offered to "
SPAN 306 "Introduction to Translation" "Prerequisite: SPAN 240 or 242 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course examines Spanish and English grammar in a comparative context in order to provide a sound basis for translation between the two languages. It also aims to develop lexical and semantic knowledge of the Spanish language through analysis of textual materials. Students translate short texts from a variety of fields such as literature, business, journalism, politics, and science. Translation is primarily from English to Spanish (some reference to French is included)."
SPAN 307 "Translation Practice" "Prerequisite: SPAN 306 or equivalent. This course continues the examination of Spanish and English grammar in a practical context as a basis for translation between the two languages. It also enhances the students lexical and semantic knowledge of the Spanish language through direct, practical experience in translation. Students translate texts from a variety of fields, with a particular emphasis on business, finance, tourism, journalism, and the arts. Translation is primarily from English to Spanish (some reference to French is included)."
SPAN 308 "Spanish for Business" "Prerequisite: SPAN 240 or 242 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course is designed to give students a solid foundation in business vocabulary and basic business practices, as well as the cultural concepts necessary to enable them to function in the Spanish-speaking business world. Activities may include the elaboration of different types of business documents, oral group activities and simulations, and the development of strategies needed for comprehension through visual and/or aural material."
SPAN 310 "Conquest and Empire: Spanish Literature from" " the 12th to the 17th Centuries"
SPAN 311 "Crisis and Introspection: Spanish Literature from" " the 18th to the 21st Centuries"
SPAN 320 "Defining Difference in Spanish America: Literature from 1500 to 1880" "Prerequisite: SPAN 240 or 242 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course introduces students to the richly varied texts of colonial Spanish America and the early independence era. It examines how from its very beginnings Spanish-American discourse attempts to distinguish itself from Peninsular traditions throughout the various cultural eras and within its socio-political contexts. Readings include letters, chronicles, poetry, and essays. Activities may include critical reading, oral discussions and presentations, summaries, and brief essays."
SPAN 321 "Identity and Independence in Spanish America:" " Literature from 1880 to the Present"
SPAN 362 "Cultures of Mexico, the Central American Region, and" " the Spanish Caribbean"
SPAN 363 "Cultures of the Southern Cone and the Andean Region" "Prerequisite: SPAN 240 or 242 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course introduces students to the cultural achievements of the nations of the region within an historical framework. Emphasis is on the interaction between the events that shape the area, the wide variety of cultures that arose there, and the forms of artistic endeavour through which the many different peoples express themselves. Argentina, Peru, and Chile are given special importance; the history and culture of Uruguay, Ecuador, and Bolivia are also highlighted. Activities may include oral discussions and presentations, analysis of written and visual texts, use of relevant Internet resources, summaries, and brief essays."
SPAN 365 "The History of Spanish Culture" "Prerequisite: SPAN 240 or 242 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. This course examines important linguistic, literary, and artistic developments of Spanish culture as they relate to the invention, consolidation, and critique of a unique Spanish identity. Activities may include oral discussions and presentations, analysis of written and visual texts, use of relevant Internet resources, summaries, and brief essays."
SPAN 371 "Phonetics and Phonology of Spanish" "Prerequisite: SPAN 301 or permission of the Department. Students in this course gain knowledge to describe the sound system of Spanish and to contrast it with English. Practical applications stemming from this course include: (a) gaining awareness and improving ones Spanish pronunciation; (b) learning to efficiently perceive and describe different varieties of Spanish; and (c) learning to identify pronunciation problems of learners of Spanish as a foreign language."
SPAN 398 "Special Topics in Spanish" ""
SPAN 399 "Special Topics in Spanish" ""
SPAN 406 "From Orality to Literacy in Medieval Spain, 1100-1500" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303, 310. This course examines the ways in which oral-popular discourses are appropriated by the representatives of official culture, as well as how emerging institutions fashion their message around a nascent concern with Hispanic identity in works from the late period of Spains era of Reconquest. Topics of inquiry may include the social and political function of oral poetry, the importance of ritualistic cultural phenomena, the growing importance of vernacular literature, and the processes of canon formation."
SPAN 411 "Freedom and Containment in Spanish Golden Age Prose," " 1550-1700"
SPAN 412 "Golden Age Drama and Poetry: Theatricality in Renaissance and" " Baroque Spain, 1500-1690"
SPAN 415 "Towards Modernity and Liberalism in Spain, 1808-1898 " "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 or equivalent. This course examines the debates that arose during Spains problematic transition towards cultural, political, and economic liberalism in the 19th century, from the outbreak of the Independence War against France until the fall of the Empire in the Americas. Content may vary from year to year and may include authors such as Zorrilla, Bcquer, Galds, and Clarn. Topics may include competing visions of rationalism and Romanticism, the interplay of literary, scientific, and economic discourses, photography and new ways of seeing reality, and the relationship between the rise of the bourgeoisie and the reconceptualization of private space."
SPAN 418 "Cultural Conflicts and Modernity in Spain, 1898-1939 " "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 or equivalent. This course examines the cultural and ideological conflicts that took place in Spain between the fall of the Spanish Empire and the Civil War. Through close readings and critical discussions of works by authors such as Unamuno, Ortega, Garca Lorca, and Buuel, students consider topics that may include the ethics of violence in cultural conflict, the relationship between culture and ideology, the role of emotions in the shaping of national identity, and the tension between humanism and technical progress."
SPAN 420 "Dictatorship and Exile in Modern Spain, 1939-1975 " "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 or equivalent. This course examines literary and cultural discourses in Spain during Francos dictatorship. Content may vary from year to year and may focus on the literature produced under the dictatorship or in exile. Through close readings and critical discussions of works by authors such as Bergamn, Erice, Aub, and Matute, students consider topics that may include the impact of censorship on cultural history, cultural hegemony and exile, reactionary ideologies of modernity, and the role of silence and fragmentary discourse against official constructions of the nation."
SPAN 422 "Spain in Transition: 1960 to the Present" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 or equivalent. This course examines Spanish literature in the context of the countrys evolution towards cultural post-modernity, since the final years of Francos dictatorship until today. Through close readings and critical discussions of works by authors such as Brossa, Goytisolo, Almodvar, and the "
SPAN 441 "Romanticism and the Construction of Identity in Spanish America," " 1820-1890"
SPAN 442 "Modernism: Modernity and Rebellion, Rupture and" " Innovation in Spanish-American Letters, 1880-1920"
SPAN 443 "The Spanish-American Boom and its Predecessors, 1950-1980" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 or equivalent. This course examines a selection of Spanish-American novels and essays of the period between approximately 1950 and 1975, known as the "
SPAN 450 "The Short Narrative in Spain and Spanish America" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 or equivalent. From its beginnings as an independent genre in the 19th century to the most recent minifiction, this course examines the short story in light of different theories of narratology, specifically as relating to the short narrative. Texts are taken from representative authors from either or both Spain and Spanish America, within their cultural context. Students are introduced to the formulation of critical discourse through a series of short essays and an oral presentation; students also write their own short fiction."
SPAN 451 "Dramatic Representations in Hispanic Cultures" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 or equivalent. This course introduces students to fundamental concepts in the study of Hispanic drama and film, as well as to wider issues of theatricality and performance. It deals with the cultural and historical relation between literature and the visual arts, and presents some basic tools and techniques of research and criticism as related to Hispanic theatre and cinema. The course may include student representations of scenes from plays studied."
SPAN 453 "From Object to Subject: Women and Discourse in Spain and" " Spanish America"
SPAN 455 "Perspectives on the Teaching of Spanish" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 previously or concurrently.. This course provides students with basic knowledge of and structured practice in the principal approaches to the teaching of Spanish to speakers of other languages. Topics may include a selection of approaches to the teaching of Spanish, such as task-based learning, communicative methods, process writing, grammar for teachers of Spanish, the use of computer technology and Internet resources for the teaching of Spanish, the development of didactic material, as well as the incorporation of Hispanic cultural material."
SPAN 461 "The History of the Spanish Language" "Prerequisite: SPAN 371 or permission of the Department. This course examines the historical and cultural evolution of the Spanish language. Topics to be considered may include the phonological and morphological development of Vulgar Latin, the development of variants between Peninsular and Spanish-American expression, and the dialogic and conflictive nature of linguistic change. In-class and take-home activities may include the translation of medieval and early modern Spanish texts into their modern equivalents."
SPAN 462 "Introduction to Spanish Linguistics" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 previously or concurrently. This course provides an introduction to the basic concepts and analytical techniques of linguistics as applied specifically to the Spanish language. It covers the main areas of Hispanic linguistics, including phonetics and phonology, morphology and syntax of the Spanish language. It may also cover topics related to semantics, pragmatics, dialectology, sociolinguistics and second language acquisition of Spanish. Activities include linguistic analysis of the sounds, words and sentences of Spanish, as well as comparisons to the structure of English and/or French when applicable. This course provides the basis for further study in the field."
SPAN 464 "Current Issues in the Hispanic Cultures: Spanish America" "Prerequisite: SPAN 301; 362 or 363, or equivalent. This course explores current newsworthy events and affairs in the political, social, and cultural spheres of Spanish America as seen through various media sources such as newspapers, magazines, radio and television, and the Internet. It includes a systematic study of techniques of oral expression. As such, activities emphasize oral skills and may include team-based class work and presentations, brief summaries, journal, and oral exams. Format and content vary from year to year."
SPAN 465 "Current Issues in the Hispanic Cultures: Spain" "Prerequisite: SPAN 301, 365. This course explores current newsworthy events and affairs in the political, social, and cultural spheres of Spain as seen through various media sources such as newspapers, magazines, radio and television, and the Internet. It includes a systematic study of techniques of oral expression. As such, activities emphasize oral skills and may include team-based class work and presentations, brief summaries, journal, and oral exams. Format and content vary from year to year."
SPAN 467 "The Avant-Gardes in Spanish America and Spain and" " their Repercussions in the Arts"
SPAN 469 "Hispanic Poetry and Poetics " "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 or equivalent. This course examines poetic discourse in Hispanic culture. Through close readings and critical discussions of works by Spanish and/or Spanish-American poets, students consider topics that may include the rhetorical and linguistic strategies of poetic discourse, poetry as ideology, poetry and the body, and the relationship between poetry and other written and oral forms of discourse."
SPAN 470 "Spanish-American Testimonio Discourse" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303; 362 or 363; or equivalent. This course offers a comprehensive study of the struggle between subaltern voices and mainstream culture, as manifested in "
SPAN 471 "The Art of Persuasion: the Hispanic Essay" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 or equivalent. This course examines the genre of essay writing in Spain and/or Spanish America. A concise historical overview traces the development of this genre to the present. The study of different types of rhetorical strategies, discourse, and objectives in essay writing focuses on contemporary texts. Students learn to develop their own skills towards the writing of effective persuasive prose."
SPAN 472 "Discourses of Discovery, Colonization, and Resistance in Spain and" " Spanish America"
SPAN 473 "Literary Translation in Spanish" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 previously or concurrently; SPAN 306. This course examines the history and principles of literary translation with reference to translation between the Spanish- and English-speaking worlds. Literary translations both from Spanish to English and vice versa are analyzed within a critical context, and students translate essays, short stories, and poetry into both languages. Equal attention is paid to Spanish and English stylistics."
SPAN 474 "Translation for Specific Fields" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 previously or concurrently; SPAN 306. This course concentrates on the technical and stylistic elements of translation of texts from a variety of fields such as business, journalism, tourism, telecommunications, and international trade. Material to be translated includes actual texts, and activities involve analysis of translation strategies and of terminological challenges pertinent to effective written communication in each domain. Translation is from both Spanish to English and English to Spanish."
SPAN 475 "Translation Issues in Spanish American Culture" "Prerequisite: SPAN 303 previously or concurrently; SPAN 306. The goal of this course is to critically revise the cultural, literary, and aesthetic role of translation in Latin American culture, particularly with regard to its textual production. Through reading and discussion of theoretical authors such as F. Schleiermacher, J. Ortega y Gasset, L. Venuti, H. K. Bhabha, and W. Mignolo, students analyze representative texts of Latin American culture which practically and aesthetically incorporate different problems and/or strategies of translation in the transcultural context of a globalization process of more than five centuries."
SPAN 480 "Tutorial I" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course consists of guided readings in Spanish language and/or Hispanic literature, culture, and translation, to meet the individual students needs."
SPAN 481 "Tutorial II" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course consists of guided readings in Spanish language and/or Hispanic literature, culture, and translation, to meet the individual students needs."
SPAN 482 "Tutorial III" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course consists of guided readings in Spanish language and/or Hispanic literature, culture, and translation, to meet the individual students needs."
SPAN 483 "Tutorial IV" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course consists of guided readings in Spanish language and/or Hispanic literature, culture, and translation, to meet the individual students needs."
SPAN 490 "Honours Project" "Prerequisite: Honours status. This course provides the honours candidate with the opportunity to prepare an extensive research project on a topic to be chosen by the candidate with the approval of a supervising member of the faculty of the Spanish section."
SPAN 498 "Advanced Topics in Spanish" ""
SPAN 499 "Advanced Topics in Spanish" ""
LING 200 "Introduction to Linguistic Science" "This course provides an introduction to the principles of general linguistics for beginners in the field. There is an emphasis on synchronic linguistic analysis, with a brief examination of historical and comparative linguistics."
LING 222 "" "This course uses language as a tool to examine the workings of the human mind. It approaches the study of language from the perspective of generative grammar as developed by Noam Chomsky and his collaborators. It deals with patterns of linguistic structure, rather than content or meaning. The goal of this course is to develop an understanding of the field of cognitive science (the study of knowledge and the mind/brain) and determine how linguistics fits in with disciplines like the study of vision, auditory perception and reasoning."
LING 298 "Selected Topics in Linguistics" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
LING 300 "Sociolinguistics" "This course studies the beliefs, interrelationships, and values of societal groups as reflected in language."
LING 315 "Syntax" "Prerequisite: LING 200 with a grade of C or higher. This course introduces students to syntactic theory in the generative tradition. Topics include structure-building operations, constituency, a variety of movement phenomena, and the relationship between the lexicon and syntactic computation. The focus is on contemporary theoretical frameworks but the course also includes some discussion of how these developed from earlier theories."
LING 322 "Linguistics and Cognitive Science" "Prerequisite: LING 222 or equivalent. This course situates generative linguistics in the cognitive sciences by providing a survey of relevant topics from psychology, artificial intelligence, computer science, ethology, and philosophy."
LING 330 "Sanskrit" "This course provides an introduction to the fundamentals of Sanskrit grammar. After developing a foundation, students are presented with a selection of short, original texts to read and translate."
LING 335 "Historical Linguistics" "Prerequisite: LING 200 with a grade of C or higher. This course provides a survey of the primary tools and methods of historical linguistics. Change and mechanisms of change at the various levels of the grammar (phonological, morphological, and syntactic) are surveyed. The comparative method, including both subgrouping and reconstruction, is treated in detail."
LING 336 "Comparative Indo-European Linguistics" "Prerequisite: LING 200 with a grade of C or higher. Through a comparative study of the phonology of the various branches of the Indo-European language family (e.g. Indo-Iranian, Hellenic, Italic, Germanic, Slavic, Baltic), this course familiarizes the student with the techniques used in linguistic reconstruction. Emphasis is given to the development and differentiation of languages through time."
LING 341 "Introduction to Romance Linguistics" "A study of the modern Romance languages, especially French, Italian, and Spanish, and their development from Latin."
LING 353 "" "Prerequisite: LING 200 or equivalent; or permission of the Department. This course treats current issues in the experimental evaluation of linguistic theories, presenting both methodological concerns and empirical results. Topics covered include sentence processing, speech perception, lexical access and language development."
LING 371 "Semantics" "Prerequisite: LING 200 with a grade of C or higher. This course introduces the basic notions required for formal analysis of meaning within a theory of language. The central objective is the development of a system for the representation of the logical structure of natural language. Contemporary works in linguistic semantics are critically examined."
LING 372 "Descriptive and Instrumental Phonetics" "Description of speech sounds in articulatory terms. Identification and description of sounds that occur outside the Indo-European family of languages. Description of speech sounds as to their acoustic qualities: frequency, amplitude, pitch, stress. Interpretation of sound spectrograms."
LING 373 "Phonology" "Prerequisite: LING 200 with a grade of C or higher. This course examines the fundamentals of distinctive-feature analysis as developed by Jakobson, Chomsky, and Halle. Theoretical concepts and notational techniques are emphasized. Students receive extensive training in data analysis and rule writing."
LING 380 "" "Prerequisite: LING 373 or equivalent. This course consists of a survey of linguistic morphology, the study of word structure, and the tools used to perform morphological analysis. The course also gives some consideration to the issues relating to a theory of morphology."
LING 398 "Selected Topics in Linguistics" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
LING 415 "" "Prerequisite: LING 315 with a grade of C or higher. This course considers current developments in the field of syntactic theory and their application to phenomena such as control, movement out of islands and binding."
LING 421 "Non-Indo-European Structures" "Prerequisite: LING 315, 373. This course is intended to give the student an in-depth acquaintance with the structure of a language which differs markedly from that of familiar Indo-European languages. The course involves working with a native speaker and/or from textual material."
LING 425 "" "Prerequisite: LING 315, 373. This course presents a survey of theoretical and empirical issues in the study of first language (L1) acquisition by children. Particular attention is paid to the role of Universal Grammar and innateness in explaining L1 acquisition, as well as to the significance of fundamental theoretical notions such as the competence/performance distinction."
LING 435 "" "Prerequisite: LING 335. This course concentrates on the nature of language change, with an investigation into the relationship between theories of linguistic structure and theories of change. The theoretical foundations of contemporary methods in the study of language change are the central focus."
LING 436 "Advanced Indo-European Studies" "Prerequisite: LING 336 or equivalent. Detailed study of the synchronic and diachronic grammars of one or more Indo-European dialects essential to the reconstruction of the proto-language. Extensive readings are undertaken in both original texts and in scholarly contributions to their elucidation. Emphasis is placed on current issues and research in the field."
LING 437 "Problems in Indo-European Comparative Grammar" "Prerequisite: LING 336 or equivalent. This course explores one or more areas of Indo-European comparative grammar of particular interest in current research. Extensive reading in the scholarly literature is undertaken with emphasis on the principles by which hypotheses in historical linguistics can be framed and the criteria for testing such hypotheses."
LING 446 "Comparative Grammar of Greek and Latin" "Prerequisite: LING 336 or CLAS 383 or 391. A study of the similarities and differences in the phonology and morphology of Ancient Greek and Latin. Some attention is also given to issues of syntax and the lexicon."
LING 447 "Mycenaean Greek" "Prerequisite: LING 336 or CLAS 383. Dating from the 14th to the 12th century BCE, Mycenaean  the language of the Linear B tablets  is the earliest form of Greek attested. In this course, selected documents will be read, both in transliteration and in the Mycenaean syllabary, with attention both to linguistic and to cultural issues."
LING 456 "Homeric Greek" "Prerequisite: LING 336 or CLAS 383. An examination of the language of Homer, an artificial mixture of dialectal and diachronic variants, a "
LING 457 "Archaic Latin and the Italic Dialects" "Prerequisite: LING 336 or CLAS 391. A study of inscriptions in archaic Latin and the ancient Italic dialects Oscan and Umbrian. Examination of the main features of phonology, morphology, syntax and the lexicon which distinguish Osco-Umbrian from Latin, with reference to their development from Proto-Indo-European."
LING 461 "Hittite" "Prerequisite: LING 336 or equivalent. The fundamentals of Hittite grammar are presented through the extensive reading of texts, both in transliteration and cuneiform. Considerable attention is given to problems of comparative grammar."
LING 471 "Advanced Semantics" "Prerequisite: LING 371 with a grade of C or higher. This course explores advanced topics in the relationship between syntactic form and linguistic meaning. The course concentrates on formal analysis of linguistic meaning in the tradition of Model Theoretic Semantics. Students are required to read original journal articles in semantics as well as other source material that cover current areas of active research."
LING 473 "" "Prerequisite: LING 373 with a grade of C or higher. This course treats current issues in the theory of phonology, such as syllable structure, stress computation, vowel harmony and tonology. Critical readings from the current theoretical literature form the basis for discussion and study."
LING 475 "" "Prerequisite: LING 315, 336, 373. This course examines the history of linguistics, with a particular focus on the structuralist predecessors of contemporary linguistic theorists. Both North American and European schools of thought are considered. Extensive reading of fundamental texts is required."
LING 477 "" "Prerequisite: LING 315, 371 with a grade of C or higher. This course discusses the interaction between syntactic structure and semantic interpretation. The course focuses both on identifying those aspects of structure and interpretation which are related (and on the mechanisms that mediate between the two) and on identifying the areas in which mismatches between structure and interpretation are found (and on possible accounts of these mismatches)."
LING 490 "" "Prerequisite: Honours status. This course provides students with the opportunity for advanced research in linguistics under the direct supervision of a faculty member. Students normally prepare a research paper on a topic chosen by the student and with the approval of the supervisor."
LING 495 "" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course provides students with the opportunity to study a topic of individual interest under the guidance of a faculty member."
LING 498 "Advanced Topics in Linguistics" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
HEBR 210 "Introductory Course in Hebrew" "A beginners course in Hebrew, with readings of classical and modern texts."
HEBR 241 "Intermediate Hebrew I" "Prerequisite: HEBR 210 or permission of the Department. This course includes a comprehensive review of Hebrew grammar and syntax and deals with additional details not covered in the introductory course. Practice is provided through compositions and readings of classical and modern Hebrew texts."
HEBR 242 "Intermediate Hebrew II " "Prerequisite: HEBR 241 or permission of the Department. This course continues the comprehensive review of Hebrew grammar and syntax, and deals with additional details not covered in the introductory course. Practice is provided through compositions and readings of classical and modern Hebrew texts."
HEBR 310 "Topics in Hebrew Literature " "Topics for this course will vary; possibilities may include modern Hebrew literature, masterpieces and genres in Hebrew literature, and others. This course is taught in English."
MGRK 290 "Modern Greek" "This course provides an introduction to the basic elements of modern Greek for the student with no knowledge of the language."
MGRK 398 "Special Topics in Modern Greek" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
MIRI 290 "Modern Irish" "This course provides an introduction to the basic elements of modern Irish for the student with no knowledge of the language."
MIRI 398 "Special Topics in Modern Irish" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
MODL 298 "Special Topics in Modern Languages" ""
MODL 299 "Special Topics in Modern Languages" ""
MODL 398 "Special Topics in Modern Languages" ""
MODL 399 "Special Topics in Modern Languages" ""
MODL 498 "Advanced Topics in Modern Languages" ""
MODL 499 "Advanced Topics in Modern Languages" ""
MRUS 290 "Russian" "This course provides an introduction to the basic elements of Russian for the student with no knowledge of the language."
MRUS 398 "Special Topics in Russian" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
COMM 205 "Business Communication" "Prerequisite: BTM 200 or equivalent previously or concurrently. This course focuses on the principles and techniques of clear, concise, and effective, written and oral communication, especially as they apply to business. The formal, grammatical, and stylistic elements of written and oral business communication are emphasized. In addition, students are instructed in and experience the use of audiovisual means of communication."
COMM 210 "Contemporary Business Thinking" "Prerequisite: COMM 205 previously or concurrently; ECON 201 or 203 or equivalent previously or concurrently. This course presents a broad survey of the world of business and aims to incite students to develop a critical perspective on business literature. Students explore foundational business theories, by studying business articles and books, and evaluating the central ideas for scope, relevance, and managerial utility. The course also fosters students inclination to keep well informed about contemporary issues in organizations and business. Basic group work techniques and basic project management skills guide the students to complete group assignments."
COMM 215 "Business Statistics" "Prerequisite: MATH 208 or equivalent; MATH 209 or equivalent; BTM 200 or INTE 290 or COMP 248 previously or concurrently. This course introduces the fundamentals of statistics as applied to the various areas of business and administration. Topics covered include techniques of descriptive statistics, basic theory of probability and probability distributions, estimation and hypotheses testing, chi-square tests in contingency table analysis and for goodness-of-fit, and linear regression and correlation."
COMM 217 "Financial Accounting" "Prerequisite: COMM 210 previously or concurrently. This course examines the theory and practice involved in measuring, reporting, and analyzing an organizations financial information. Concepts underlying financial statements are discussed, with an emphasis on generally accepted accounting principles. Disclosures/requirements concerning financial statements as well as information needs of decision-makers are introduced."
COMM 220 "Analysis of Markets" "Prerequisite: COMM 210, 215; ECON 201 or equivalent; ECON 203 or equivalent previously or concurrently. This course provides a general perspective on the history, operation and relationships between Canadian and international product, labour and financial markets. Specifically, students are introduced to issues of fundamental importance to todays managers and entrepreneurs such as changes in structure and competitiveness in these markets in response to government policies, the determination and behaviour of interest rates, inflation, market integration, and the role and function of financial intermediation. It further provides students with the knowledge of the role and impact of regulation and other government interventions in these markets."
COMM 222 "Organizational Behaviour and Theory" "Prerequisite: COMM 205, 210. This course is designed to provide students with an opportunity to study individual behaviour in formal organizations. Through theoretical case and experiential approaches, the focus of instruction progressively moves through individual, group and organizational levels of analysis. Topics in the course include perception, learning, personality, motivation, leadership, group behaviour, and organizational goals and structure."
COMM 223 "Marketing Management I" "Prerequisite: COMM 205, 210 previously or concurrently. This survey course introduces students to the key concepts in marketing. Topics covered include marketing strategy, buyer behaviour, and the impact of technology on the discipline. The course also explores the important role that marketing plays in advancing society."
COMM 225 "Production and Operations Management" "Prerequisite: COMM 205, 210, 215. This course is an introduction to contemporary operational issues and techniques in the manufacturing and service sectors. Among the topics covered are operations strategy, forecasting, materials management, total quality management, time-based competition, and minimal manufacturing. Mathematical modelling in resource allocation is also introduced. Cases and computer-aided quantitative tools for decision-making are used throughout the course with an emphasis on the interactions between production/operations management and other business disciplines."
COMM 226 "Business Technology Management " "Prerequisite: COMM 210 previously or concurrently. The objective of this course is to provide students with an understanding of the role of information technology in business organizations. Students learn how information technologies can be used to create business value, solve business problems, accomplish corporate goals and achieve and maintain a competitive advantage."
COMM 299 "Special Topics in Business" "This course enables students to focus on a specific topic in business that is of interest to all students."
COMM 305 "Managerial Accounting" "Prerequisite: COMM 217. This course covers the development of accounting information to assist management in carrying out its functions effectively and efficiently. Concepts and techniques for planning, performance evaluation, control, and decision-making are introduced. New developments are addressed with a focus on contemporary business issues and real-world applicability of management accounting concepts and techniques."
COMM 308 "Introduction to Finance" "Prerequisite: COMM 217; COMM 220 previously or concurrently. This course provides a general understanding of the fundamental concepts of finance theory as they apply to the firms long-run and short-run financing, and investment decisions. Building on the objective of firm value maximization, students become familiar with the conceptual issues underlying risk and return relationships and their measurements, as well as the valuation of financial securities. They also learn the concept of cost of capital, its measurement, and the techniques of capital budgeting as practised by todays managers. Students are introduced to the basic issues surrounding the firms short-term and long-term funding decisions and its ability to pay dividends."
COMM 315 "Business Law and Ethics" "Prerequisite: COMM 308. This course introduces students to important legal and ethical issues that they may encounter within a business organization. Through the study of laws, ethical principles and court judgments, students develop an understanding of legal and ethical issues, as well as the skills necessary to assist them in making sound legal and ethical decisions."
COMM 320 "Entrepreneurship" "Prerequisite: COMM 222, 223 or 224, 305, 308. This course introduces students to entrepreneurship. Students analyze and integrate entrepreneurship concepts into business development cases. They research, prepare, and present a comprehensive business plan that may involve commercial, technological and social innovations delivered through new projects by either new business ventures or existing firms. Since the business plan integrates aspects of accountancy, marketing, financing, human resources management, and operations management, students benefit from knowledge of entrepreneurship, regardless of their career goals. Project activities require teamwork, leadership and communication skills."
COMM 401 "Strategy and Competition" "Prerequisite: 45 business credits including COMM 225; COMM 226 or 301; COMM 315 and 320 previously or concurrently. This capstone course requires graduating students to demonstrate their ability to integrate the knowledge and skills they have acquired during their program. This course introduces the major models and theories in strategic management. Emphasis is on integrating concepts and methods for systematically assessing the external environment and internal company conditions that influence firm performance. Lecture topics and case studies are selected to portray the nature of the strategic process and the dynamics of competition in a variety of contexts. Additionally, the connection between organizational strategy and the physical environment is examined."
COMM 499 "Seminar Course" "Prerequisite: To be determined each academic term. This course enables students, on an individual basis, to further focus on a specialized topic within their discipline."
COMP 108 "Computer Science Industrial Experience Reflective LearningI " "Prerequisite: Permission of the GCS. This course is a reflective learning module for students in their related field which is based on their academic requirements and their first industrial experience."
COMP 201 "Introduction to Computing" "Prerequisite: MATH 201 or equivalent. Overview of computing systems. Problem solving and algorithms. Introduction to computer programming. Hardware, software and data storage, programming languages, data organization, program design and development. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
COMP 208 "Computer Science Industrial Experience Reflective LearningII " "Prerequisite: COMP108 and permission of the GCS. This course expands on the students second industrial experience term in their related field of study to further develop their knowledge and workrelated skills."
COMP 218 "Fundamentals of Programming" "Prerequisite: MATH 201 or equivalent (no priorexperience with computers is assumed). Computers and computing: problem solving with computers, basic data types, expressions, assignments, control structures, simple library functions, programmerdefined functions, arrays of basic types. Basic elements of objectoriented programming: classes, objects and methods. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
COMP 228 "System Hardware" "Prerequisite: COMP 248; MATH 203 or Cegep Mathematics 103 or NYA previously or concurrently; MATH 204 or Cegep Mathematics 105 or NYC previously or concurrently. Levels of system abstraction and von Neumann model. Basics of digital logic design. Data representation and manipulation. Instruction set architecture. Processor internals. Assembly language programming. Memory subsystem and cache management. I/O subsystem. Introduction to network organization and architecture. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
COMP 232 "Mathematics for Computer Science" "Prerequisite: MATH 203 or Cegep Mathematics 103 or NYA; MATH 204 or Cegep Mathematics 105 or NYC. Sets. Propositional logic and predicate calculus. Functions and relations. Elements of number theory. Mathematical reasoning. Proof techniques: direct proof, indirect proof, proof by contradiction, proof by induction. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
COMP 233 "Probability and Statistics for Computer Science" "Prerequisite: MATH 205 or Cegep Mathematics 203 or NYB. Combinatorics. Axioms of probability. Conditional probability. Discrete and continuous probability distributions. Expectation and moments. Hypothesis testing. Parameter estimation. Correlation and linear regression. Applications to computer science. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
COMP 248 "ObjectOriented ProgrammingI" "Prerequisite: MATH 204 or Cegep Mathematics 105 or NYC previously or concurrently. Introduction to programming. Basic data types, variables, expressions, assignments, control flow. Classes, objects, methods. Information hiding, public vs. private visibility, data abstraction and encapsulation. References. Arrays. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week. Laboratory: one hour per week."
COMP 249 "ObjectOriented ProgrammingII " "Prerequisite: COMP 248; MATH203 or Cegep Mathematics 103 or NYA; MATH205 orCegep Mathematics 203 or NYB previously orconcurrently. Design of classes. Inheritance. Polymorphism. Static and dynamic binding. Abstract classes. Exception handling. File I/O. Recursion. Interfaces and inner classes. Graphical user interfaces. Generics. Collections and iterators. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week. Laboratory: one hour per week."
COMP 326 "Computer Architecture" "Prerequisite: COMP 346. Computer architecture models: controlflow and dataflow. Concurrency and locality, data dependency theory. Instruction level parallelism. Instruction scheduling. Pipelined processors. Vector processors. Thread level parallelism. Multiprocessors. Shared memory models. Coherence protocols. Interconnection networks. Performance issues. Advanced topics in contemporary computer architectures. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
COMP 335 "Introduction to Theoretical Computer Science" "Prerequisite: COMP 232 or COEN 231; COMP249 or COEN 244. Finite state automata and regular languages. Pushdown automata and contextfree languages. Pumping lemmas. Applications to parsing. Turing machines. Undecidability and decidability. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
COMP 339 "Combinatorics " "Prerequisite: COMP 232 or 18 credits in postCegep Mathematics. General principles of counting, permutations, combinations, identities, partitions, generating functions, Fibonacci numbers, Stirling numbers, Catalan numbers, principle of inclusionexclusion. Graphs, subgraphs, isomorphism, Euler graphs, Hamilton paths and cycles, planar graphs, Kuratowskis Theorem, trees, colouring, 5colour theorem, matching, Halls theorem."
COMP 345 "Advanced Program Design with C++ " "Prerequisite: COMP 352 previously or concurrently. Introduction to C++. I/O with stream classes. Pointers and their uses. TheStandard Template Library (STL): containers, algorithms, iterators, adaptors, function objects. Class design: constructors, destructors, operator overloading, inheritance, virtual functions, exception handling, memory management. Advanced topics: libraries, locales, STL conventions, concurrency, template metaprogramming. Applications of C++: systems, engineering, games programming. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 346 "Operating Systems" "Prerequisite: COMP 228 or SOEN 228; COMP352. Fundamentals of operating system functionalities, design and implementation. Multiprogramming: processes and threads, context switching, queuing models and scheduling. Interprocess communication and synchronization. Principles of concurrency. Synchronization primitives. Deadlock detection and recovery, prevention and avoidance schemes. Memory management. Device management. File systems. Protection models and schemes. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 348 "Principles of Programming Languages" "Prerequisite: COMP249. Survey of programming paradigms: Imperative, functional, and logic programming. Issues in the design and implementation of programming languages. Declaration models: binding, visibility, and scope. Type systems, including static and dynamic typing. Parameter passing mechanisms. Hybrid language design. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
COMP 352 "Data Structures and Algorithms" "Prerequisite: COMP 232 previously or concurrently; COMP 249. Abstract data types: stacks and queues, trees, priority queues, dictionaries. Data structures: arrays, linked lists, heaps, hash tables, search trees. Design and analysis of algorithms: asymptotic notation, recursive algorithms, searching and sorting, tree traversal, graph algorithms. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
COMP 353 "Databases" "Prerequisite: COMP 232 or COEN 231; COMP 352 or COEN 352. Introduction to database management systems. Conceptual database design: the entityrelationship model. The relational data model and relational algebra: functional dependencies and normalization. The SQL language and its application in defining, querying, and updating databases; integrity constraints; triggers. Developing database applications. Other data models: Datalog. Objectoriented data model and ODL. Semistructured data. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 354 "Introduction to Software Engineering " "Prerequisite: COMP 352; ENCS282. Software development process models (e.g. linear vs. iterative). Project management; roles, activities and deliverables for each software life cycle phase. Requirements management: analysis, elicitation, and scope. Architecture, design and the mapping of requirements to design and design to implementation. Traceability. Software quality assurance: verification, validation and the role of testing. Maintenance and evolution. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 361 "Elementary Numerical Methods" "Prerequisite: COMP 232, 249. Vector and matrix norms. Numerical methods for solving linear systems, Gaussian elimination, LUdecomposition, error analysis. Numerical solution of nonlinear equations, Newtons method, fixed point iterations. Interpolation and approximation, Taylor, Lagrange, Chebyshev and Legendre polynomials. Cubic spline interpolation. Numerical differentiation, numerical integration, Gauss quadrature. Discrete leastsquares approximation. Initial value problems in ordinary differential equations, stiff differential equations. Boundary value problems in ordinary differential equations. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
COMP 367 "Techniques in Symbolic Computation" "Prerequisite: COMP 232 or MAST 217; COMP 248 or MAST 234. Symbolic computation and its use in pure and applied mathematics, in particular in algebra, number theory, cryptography, coding theory, and combinatorics. Programming in a symboliccomputing system (e.g. MAPLE)."
COMP 371 "Computer Graphics" "Prerequisite: COMP 232 or COEN 231; COMP 352 or COEN352. Introduction to computer graphics and graphics hardware. Introduction to graphics API and graphics systems architecture. Mathematics of 2D and 3D transformations, and 2D and 3D viewing. Colour and basic rendering algorithms. Visual realism and visibility. Illumination and shading, global illumination techniques, and textures. Introduction to curves and surfaces, and 3D object modelling. Introduction to computer animation. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 376 "Introduction to Game Development " "Prerequisite: COMP 371. Introduction to design and implementation aspects of computer gaming: basic game design, storytelling and narratives, and game genres. Virtual environments, 2D and 3D game engines, and game development tools. Character development, gameplay strategies, level design in games, and user interfaces. Architecture of game consoles, analog and digital controllers, and the incorporation of graphics, sound, and music in game implementations. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 425 "Computer Vision " "This course introduces basic techniques and concepts in computer vision including image formation, grouping and fitting, geometric vision, recognition, perceptual organization, and the stateofthe art software tools. Students learn fundamental algorithms and techniques, and gain experience in programming visionbased components; in particular, how to program in OpenCV, a powerful software interface used to process data captured from passive and active sensors. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 426 "Multicore Programming " "Prerequisite: COMP 346 or COEN346. Fundamental concepts of computer architecture. Architecture of the selected multicore platform. Review of sharedmemory parallel programming. The difficulties inherent to parallel programming. Scalability of programming models. The stream programming model for multicore. Implicit and explicit threading. Implicit and explicit orchestration of data movement, both on chip and off. Adapting standard algorithms to multicore. Critical assessment of the available systemsoftware support. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 428 "Parallel Programming " "Prerequisite: COMP 346 or COEN 346. Parallel programming techniques as a natural extension to sequential programming. Overview of parallelprogramming architectures and models. Parallel programming issues: locality, granularity, scheduling, data decomposition and distribution, load balancing, communication and synchronization, determinacy and nondeterminacy, cost and performance. Techniques and tools for messagepassing parallel programming. Case studies. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 442 "Compiler Design" "Prerequisite: COMP 228 or SOEN228 or COEN311; COMP335; COMP 352 or COEN352. Compiler organization and implementation: lexical analysis and parsing, syntaxdirected translation, code optimization. Runtime systems. Project. Lectures:three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 444 "System Software Design" "Prerequisite: COMP 346. Detailed examination of the design, implementation and system call interface of a contemporary operating system: its kernel, file system, process and thread management including scheduling, file system design and implementation, memory management, device management, I/O management, interprocess communication and synchronization mechanisms, system call interface, interrupt handling, and other advanced issues. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 445 "Data Communication and Computer Networks" "Prerequisite: COMP 346. Network architectures: OSI and Internet models. Link layer: error detection, multiple access protocols, addressing. Local area networks: Ethernet, ATM, switches and hubs. Network layer: forwarding and routing, IP, routing algorithms, multicast. Transport layer: connectionless and connectionoriented transport, reliable data transport, congestion control, QoS, UDP and TCP. Application layer: DNS, the web and http, file transfer, and email. Introduction to network security, multimedia protocols and wireless networking. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 451 "Database Design" "Prerequisite: COMP 353. Storage management. Buffer management. Data organization. Index structures. Query optimization and execution. Transaction management. Recovery. Concurrency control. Database performance analysis and tuning. New trends in database technology. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 465 "Design and Analysis of Algorithms" "Prerequisite: COMP 232 or COEN 231; COMP 339; COMP 352 or COEN352. Order statistics: worstcase, averagecase and amortized analysis. Algorithm design techniques: greedy algorithms, dynamic programming. Selected algorithms from graph theory, linear programming, number theory, string matching, and computational geometry. A survey of hardproblems, NPcompleteness, and approximation algorithms. Lectures: three hours per week."
COMP 472 "Artificial Intelligence" "Prerequisite: COMP 352 or COEN 352. Scope of AI. Firstorder logic. Automated reasoning. Search and heuristic search. Gameplaying. Planning. Knowledge representation. Probabilistic reasoning. Introduction to machine learning. Introduction to natural language processing. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 473 "Pattern Recognition" "Prerequisite: COMP 352. Preprocessing. Feature extraction and selection. Similarity between patterns and distance measurements. Syntactic and statistical approaches. Clustering analysis. Bayesian decision theory and discriminant functions. Neural networks and machine learning. Applications. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 474 "Intelligent Systems" "Prerequisite: COMP 352 or COEN 352. Rulebased expert systems, blackboard architecture, and agentbased. Knowledge acquisition and representation. Uncertainty and conflict resolution. Reasoning and explanation. Design of intelligent systems. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 476 "Advanced Game Development " "Prerequisite: COMP 361 or ENGR 391; COMP376. Introduction to advanced aspects of computer games. Game engine design. Artificial Intelligence (AI): nonplayer character movement, coordinated movement, pathfinding, world representations; decision making; tactical AI, strategic AI, learning in games. Physicsbased techniques: collision detection and response. Networked gaming: multiplayer games, networking and distributed game design, mobile gaming. Improving realism: cut scenes, 3D sound. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 477 "Animation for Computer Games " "Prerequisite: COMP 361 or ENGR 391; COMP371. Introduction to the algorithms, data structures, and techniques used in modelling and rendering dynamic scenes. Topics include principles of traditional animation, production pipeline, animation hardware and software, orientation representation and interpolation, modelling physical and articulated objects, forward and inverse kinematics, motion control and capture, keyframe, procedural, and behavioural animation, camera animation, scripting system, and freeform deformation. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 478 "Image Processing" "Prerequisite: COMP 352. Digital image fundamentals, image transforms (Fourier, Walsh, Haar, Hotelling, wavelet), image enhancement (histogram processing, spatial filtering, high and lowpass filtering), image restoration, image compression (elements of information theory, image compression models, errorfree compression, lossy compression, image compression standards), image segmentation (line detection, Hough transform, edge detection and linking, thresholding, region splitting and merging), representation and description (chain codes, signatures, skeletons, shape descriptors, moments, texture). Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 479 "Information Retrieval and Web Search" "Prerequisite: COMP 233 or ENGR 371; COMP352. Basics of information retrieval (IR): boolean, vector space and probabilistic models. Tokenization and creation of inverted files. Weighting schemes. Evaluation of IR systems: precision, recall, Fmeasure. Relevance feedback and query expansion. Application of IR to web search engines: XML, link analysis, PageRank algorithm. Text categorization and clustering techniques as used in spam filtering. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMP 490 "Computer Science Project I" "Prerequisite: ENCS282; completion of 60credits; permission of the Department. Students work on a computer science project under the supervision of a faculty member and submit a suitable written report on the work carried out. Students planning to register for this course should consult with the Department prior to registration in the final year of study."
COMP 492 "Computer Science Project II" "Prerequisite: COMP 490 previously or concurrently; permission of the Department. Students work on a computer science project under the supervision of a faculty member and submit a suitable written report on the work carried out. Students planning to register for this course should consult with the Department prior to registration in their final year of study."
COMP 495 "Honours Seminar" "Prerequisite: ENCS282; registration in the final year of the honours program. Students are required to attend a number of departmental seminars and submit a written report on them."
COMP 498 "Topics in Computer Science" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course may be offered in a given year upon the authorization of the Department. The content may vary from offering to offering and will be chosen to complement the available elective courses. Lectures: three hours per week."
COMP 499 "Topics in Computer Science with Lab" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course may be offered in a given year upon the authorization of the Department. The content may vary from offering to offering and will be chosen to complement the available elective courses. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
SOEN 228 "System Hardware" "Prerequisite: MATH 203 or Cegep Mathematics 103, MATH 204 or Cegep Mathematics 105. Processor structure, Data and Instructions, Instruction Set Processor (ISP) level view of computer hardware, assembly language level use. Memory systems  RAM and disks, hierarchy of memories. I/O organization, I/O devices and their diversity, their interconnection to CPU and Memory. Communication between computers at the physical level. Networks and computers. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
SOEN 287 "Web Programming " "Prerequisite: COMP 248. Internet architecture and protocols. Web applications through clients and servers. Markup languages. Clientside programming using scripting languages. Static website contents and dynamic page generation through serverside programming. Preserving state (clientside) in web applications. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
SOEN 298 "System Hardware Lab " "Prerequisite: Permission of the undergraduate program director. Digital design exercises including assembly and testing corresponding to the SOEN 228 lab. Laboratory: two hours per week."
SOEN 321 "Information Systems Security" "Prerequisite: COMP 346 or COEN 346. Protocol layers and security protocols. Intranets and extranets. Mobile computing. Electronic commerce. Security architectures in opennetwork environments. Cryptographic security protocols. Threats, attacks, and vulnerabilities. Security services: confidentiality; authentication; integrity; access control; nonrepudiation; and availability. Security mechanisms: encryption; dataintegrity mechanisms; digital signatures; keyed hashes; accesscontrol mechanisms; challengeresponse authentication; traffic padding; routing control; and notarization. Keymanagement principles. Distributed and embedded firewalls. Security zones. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
SOEN 331 "Introduction to Formal Methods for Software Engineering" "Prerequisite: COMP 232, 249. Assertions. Static and dynamic checking. Method specification using preconditions and postconditions. Strengthening and weakening. Design by contract. Hoare logic. Invariants. Class specification using invariants. Software tools for assertion checking and verification. Reliable software development. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
SOEN 341 "Software Process" "Prerequisite: COMP352 or COEN352; ENCS282 previously ortsiles of software engineering. Introduction to software process models. Activities in each phase, including review activities. Working in teams: organization; stages of formation; roles; conflict resolution. Notations used in software documentation. How to review, revise, and improve software documentation. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
SOEN 342 "Software Requirements and Specifications" "Prerequisite: SOEN 341. Requirements engineering. Functional and nonfunctional requirements. Traceability. Test generation. Formal and informal specifications. Formal specification languages. Reasoning with specifications. Correctness issues. Verification. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
SOEN 343 "Software Architecture and DesignI" "Prerequisite: SOEN 341; SOEN 342 previously or concurrently. From requirements to design to implementation. Planned vs. evolutionary design and refactoring. Modeldriven design and Unified Modelling Language (UML). Structural and behavioural design descriptions and specifications. General and domainspecific design principles, patterns and idioms. Objectoriented design concepts such as interfaces vs. abstract types, polymorphism, generics, and delegation vs. subclassing. Introduction tosoftware architecture (styles and view models). Design quality. Design rationale. Design methodologies (e.g.based on responsibility assignment). Testdriven development. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
SOEN 344 "Software Architecture and DesignII" "Prerequisite: SOEN 343. Architectural activities, roles, and deliverables. Architectural view models. Architectural styles (including clientserver, layered, pipesandfilters, eventbased, process control) and frameworks. Architectural analysis and the interplay with requirements elicitation. Notations for expressing architectural designs, structural and behavioural specifications. From architectural design to detailed design. Domain specific architectures and design patterns. Evaluation and performance estimation of designs. Advanced objectoriented design patterns and idioms. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
SOEN 345 "Software Testing, Verification and Quality Assurance" "Prerequisite: SOEN 343 previously or concurrently. Testing strategies. Specificationbased vs. codebased, blackbox vs. whitebox, functional vs. structural testing; unit, integration, system, acceptance, and regression testing. Verification vs. validation. Test planning, design and artifacts. Introduction to software reliability and quality assurance. Formal verification methods, oracles; static and dynamic program verification. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
SOEN 357 "User Interface Design" "Prerequisite: SOEN 341. The human side: I/O; memory; and information processing. Interaction: mental models; human error; interaction frameworks and paradigms. Direct manipulation. User interface design: principles; standards; and guidelines. Usercentred design: standards and design rationale; heuristic evaluation; iterative design; and prototyping. Taskcentred design. Rationalized design: usability engineering; dialogue notations; user models; diagrammatic notations; and textual notations. Evaluation: with the user; without the user; quantitative; and qualitative. Implementation support. Help and documentation. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
SOEN 384 "Management, Measurement and Quality Control" "Prerequisite: ENCS 282; SOEN341. Organization of large software development. Roles of team members, leaders, managers, stakeholders, and users. Tools for monitoring and controlling a schedule. Financial, organizational, human, and computational resources allocation and control. Project and quality reviews, inspections, and walkthroughs. Risk management. Communication and collaboration. Cause and effects of project failure. Project management via the Internet. Quality assurance and control. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
SOEN 385 "Control Systems and Applications" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213, 233. Mathematical modelling of dynamical systems; block diagrams; feedback; open and closed loops. Linear differential equations; time domain analysis; free, forced, and total response; steady state and transient response. Laplace transform and inverse transform; second order systems. Transfer functions and stability. Control system design: PID and root locus techniques. Computer simulation of control systems. Applications. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
SOEN 387 "WebBased Enterprise Application Design" "Prerequisite: COMP 353 previously or concurrently; COMP 354 or SOEN341; SOEN 287. Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), web markup languages andencodings. Document Object Models (DOM). Client/server and layered architectures for Webbased Enterprise Applications (WEA). Presentation, Domain and Data Source design patterns. Clientside programming. Java servlets and Java Server Pages. Authentication, security and transaction processing. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
SOEN 390 "Software Engineering Team Design Project" "Prerequisite: SOEN 344 and 357 previously or concurrently. Students work in teams to design and implement a software project from requirements provided by the coordinator. Each team will demonstrate the software and prepare adequate documentation for it. In addition, each student will write an individual report. Lectures: two hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: three hours per week."
SOEN 422 "Embedded Systems and Software" "Prerequisite: COMP 346. Characteristics of embedded systems. Microcontroller architectures and their software. Development environments. Operating system configuration. Interprocessor and remote communication. Interface, timer and interrupt configuration. Control of physical systems. Design, implementation and testing of integrated systems. Advanced topics. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
SOEN 423 "Distributed Systems" "Prerequisite: COMP 346. Principles of distributed computing: scalability, transparency, concurrency, consistency, fault tolerance, high availability. Clientserver interaction technologies: interprocess communication, sockets, group communication, remote procedure call, remote method invocation, object request broker, CORBA, web services. Server design techniques: process replication, fault tolerance through passive replication, high availability through active replication, coordination and agreement, transactions and concurrency control. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
SOEN 448 "Management of Evolving Systems" "Prerequisite: SOEN 342, 343, 344. Software maintenance: corrective; perfective; and adaptive. Software reuse; construction of reusable software. Techniques for reverse engineering and reengineering software. Software development as growing software. Longterm evolution of software systems. Legacy systems. Lectures: three hours per week."
SOEN 449 "Component Engineering" "Prerequisite: SOEN 344. Review of highlevel language concepts and abstraction mechanisms. Programming with functional and logical languages. Typed vs. untyped languages. The use of scripting languages and other languagebased techniques to assemble systems from highlevel components. Lectures: three hours per week."
SOEN 487 "Web Services and Applications " "Prerequisite: SOEN 387 previously or concurrently. Analysis and design of web services and applications. Advanced architectures for the design, deployment, and testing of large multiserver webservices and applications. Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). Electronic Commerce. Security. Load balancing. Stress testing. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
SOEN 490 "Capstone Software Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: 75 credits in the program; SOEN 390. Students work in teams of at least four members to construct a significant software application. The class meets at regular intervals. Team members will give a presentation of their contribution to the project. Lectures: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week. Two terms."
SOEN 491 "Software Engineering Project" "Prerequisite: Permission of the undergraduate program director. Theoretical or practical project in an advanced topic in software engineering."
SOEN 498 "Topics in Software Engineering" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course may be offered in a given year upon the authorization of the Department. The content may vary from offering to offering and will be chosen to complement the available elective courses. Lectures: three hours per week."
SOEN 499 "Topics in Software Engineering with Lab" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course may be offered in a given year upon the authorization of the Department. The content may vary from offering to offering and will be chosen to complement the available elective courses. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
COMS 274 "Communication Media: Intermedia I (3 credits)" ""
COMS 276 "Communication Media: Sound I (3 credits)" ""
COMS 284 "Communication Media: Moving Images I (3 credits)" ""
COMS 374 "Communication Media: Intermedia II (6 credits)" ""
COMS 376 "Communication Media: Sound II (6 credits)" ""
COMS 384 "Communication Media: Moving Images II (6 credits)" ""
COMS 393 "Communication Media: Special Topics (3 credits)" ""
COMS 475 "Communication Media: Intermedia III (3 credits)" ""
COMS 477 "Communication Media: Sound III (3 credits)" ""
COMS 484 "Communication Media: Moving Images III (3 credits)" ""
COMS 491 "Communication Media: Portfolio (3 credits)" ""
COMS 205 "Effective Communication Skills (3 credits)" ""
COMS 220 "History of Communication and Media (3 credits)" ""
COMS 225 "Media Institutions and Policies (3 credits)" ""
COMS 240 "Communication Theory (3 credits)" ""
COMS 301 "Selected Topics in National Cinemas (3 credits)" ""
COMS 304 "Selected Topics in Film Studies (3 credits)" ""
COMS 305 "Media Criticism (3 credits)" ""
COMS 307 "Scriptwriting for Media (3 credits)" ""
COMS 308 "Selected Topics in Video (3 credits)" ""
COMS 309 "Studies in Documentary (3 credits)" ""
COMS 310 "Media Genres (3 credits)" ""
COMS 319 "Media Literacy (3 credits)" ""
COMS 324 "Communication Analysis of Environment (3 credits)" ""
COMS 325 "Approaches to Communication Research (3 credits)" ""
COMS 333 "Games, Media and Culture (3 credits)" ""
COMS 352 "Media Policy in Canada (3 credits)" ""
COMS 354 "Youth and Media (3 credits)" ""
COMS 355 "Media and New Technology (3 credits)" ""
COMS 357 "Media and Critical Theory (3 credits)" ""
COMS 360 "Mass Media (3 credits)" ""
COMS 361 "Propaganda (3 credits)" ""
COMS 362 "Psychology of Communication (3 credits)" ""
COMS 365 "History of Sound Recording (3 credits)" ""
COMS 367 "Media and Cultural Context (3 credits)" ""
COMS 368 "Media and Gender (3 credits)" ""
COMS 369 "Visual Communication and Culture (3 credits)" ""
COMS 370 "Advertising and the Consumer Culture (3 credits)" ""
COMS 371 "Public Relations: Principles and Problems (3 credits)" ""
COMS 372 "Theories of Public Discourse (3 credits)" ""
COMS 373 "Topics in Media and Cultural History (3 credits)" ""
COMS 394 "Communication Studies Apprenticeship I (3 credits)" ""
COMS 395 "Communication Studies Apprenticeship II (3 credits)" ""
COMS 398 "Selected Topics in Communication Studies (3 credits)" ""
COMS 399 "Selected Topics in Communication Studies (6 credits)" ""
COMS 407 "Advanced Scriptwriting for Media (3 credits)" ""
COMS 410 "Acoustic Communication and Design (3 credits)" ""
COMS 411 "Sexuality and Public Discourse (3 credits)" ""
COMS 412 "Discourses of Dissent (3 credits)" ""
COMS 413 "Cultures of Production (3 credits)" ""
COMS 414 "Production Administration (3 credits)" ""
COMS 415 "Advanced Topics in the Photographic Image (3 credits)" ""
COMS 416 "Advanced Media Criticism (3 credits)" ""
COMS 418 "Cultures of Globalization (3 credits)" ""
COMS 419 "Communications and Indigenous Peoples (3 credits)" ""
COMS 420 "Reception Studies (3 credits)" ""
COMS 421 "Communicative Performances and Interventions (3 credits)" ""
COMS 422 "Perspectives on the Information Society (3 credits)" ""
COMS 423 "Media Art and Aesthetics (3 credits)" ""
COMS 424 "Alternative Media (3 credits)" ""
COMS 425 "Advanced Seminar in Cultural Studies (3 credits)" ""
COMS 426 "Television Studies (3 credits)" ""
COMS 427 "Social Media Platforms and Policy (3 credits)" ""
COMS 434 "Advanced Topics in Film Studies (3 credits)" ""
COMS 435 "Advanced Topics in Documentary (3 credits)" ""
COMS 437 "Media Forecast (3 credits)" ""
COMS 453 "Communication Ethics (3 credits)" ""
COMS 455 "Food, Media and Culture (3 credits)" ""
COMS 456 "News, Media and Power (3 credits)" ""
COMS 460 "Political Communication (3 credits)" ""
COMS 461 "Organizational Communication (3 credits)" ""
COMS 462 "Communication, Culture and Popular Art (3 credits)" ""
COMS 463 "Semiotics (3 credits)" ""
COMS 464 "Race, Ethnicity and Media (3 credits)" ""
COMS 465 "Rhetoric and Communication (3 credits)" ""
COMS 468 "Communications, Development and Colonialism (3 credits)" ""
COMS 472 "Communication Technologies and Gender (3 credits)" ""
COMS 473 "International Communication (3 credits)" ""
COMS 496 "Directed Study I (3 credits)" ""
COMS 497 "Directed Study II (3 credits)" ""
COMS 498 "Advanced Topics in Communication Studies (3 credits)" ""
COMS 499 "Advanced Topics in Communication Studies (6 credits)" ""
COMS 220 "History of Communication and Media" "Prerequisite: Registration in a Communication Studies program. This course examines communication and media from a comparative and historical perspective. Topics include the transition from orality to literacy, the print revolution, the rise of imaging technologies, and the emergence of modern publics, nations, and global media systems. Assignments introduce methods of historical research."
COMS 225 "Media Institutions and Policies" "Prerequisite: Registration in Communication and Cultural Studies Major. This course introduces students to the analysis of the institutional, political, and economic forces that have shaped the development of media during the 20th century. Attention is given to the ownership structures, corporate practices, and state policy interventions affecting media institutions in both the public and private sectors. A particular focus is given to the interrelations between Cultural, Multicultural, and Communication Policy interventions."
COMS 240 "Communication Theory" "Prerequisite: Registration in a Communication Studies program. Through lectures, discussions, and selected readings from the works of key theoreticians, this course introduces students to major approaches to the understanding of the process of communication."
COMS 274 "Communication Media: Intermedia I" "Prerequisite: Registration in a Major or Specialization in Communication Studies. This course provides a theoretical and applied introduction to intermedia art and media practices such as remediation, design, animation, interactivity, installation, and performance. General emphasis on creative process, and proof-of-concept media creations, rather than finished media productions."
COMS 276 "Communication Media: Sound I" "Prerequisite: Registration in the Major or Specialization in Communication Studies. This course introduces students to acoustic, analog, and digital components of audio systems. Students explore the communicational and aesthetic characteristics of sound. Through practical exercises students learn how to structure sound into imaginative aural forms across various media."
COMS 284 "Communication Media: Moving Images I" "Prerequisite: Registration in the Major or Specialization in Communication Studies. This course provides a foundation in the creative, critical, and technical aspects of film and digital video production, including an introduction to non-linear editing software. Through collaborative assignments, lectures, discussions and readings, students explore the distinct language of each medium and develop video production skills through teamwork."
COMS 298 "Selected Topics in Communication Studies" ""
COMS 299 "Selected Topics in Communication Studies" ""
COMS 301 "Selected Topics in National Cinemas" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course focuses on selected national cinemas. The analytic perspective of the course varies but may encompass such issues as cultural contexts; aesthetic conventions; economic and policy constraints; and the history of canons and their renewals. Specific topics for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
COMS 304 "Selected Topics in Film Studies" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). The topic of this course varies but may include such issues as film theories; the political economy of cinema; the analysis of particular periods in film history; the analysis of the films of particular directors and/or producers; film policies, or the relations between film, video, and television. Specific topics for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
COMS 305 "Media Criticism" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). Through lectures, discussions, readings, and critical analyses, this course offers students insight into the major schools and practices of media criticism. The course explores the relationships between formal, aesthetic, representational, and sensory elements of media texts and discourses."
COMS 307 "Scriptwriting for Media " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1); registration in a Major or Specialization in Communication Studies; submission of a sample of creative writing by June 30 and subsequent approval by the instructor. This course is designed to provide knowledge of and practice in the forms and formats of scripts for media. Topics include the anatomy of a script, the relation between audio and visual elements, and the specificity of particular narrative and non-narrative genres. Emphasis is placed upon formal structures, such as story construction and plot development, character and dialogue, tension, conflict, resolution, and harmony."
COMS 308 "Selected Topics in Video " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course investigates a variety of video practices from the 1960s to present. These practices range from video as a political tool to video art and installation. Students gain an understanding of the critical and creative uses of video as a tool for communication and change."
COMS 309 "Studies in Documentary " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course offers a survey of documentary genres in various media. Topics include the characteristic styles and forms of documentary, the function of documentary, and its relationship to truth and knowledge. The course consists of lectures, screenings, readings, critique, and discussion."
COMS 310 "Media Genres " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course presents the concept of genre as a framework for the study of media. Topics may include the history of development of genre theory, the distinctive fictive and non-fictive genres of particular media, and the analysis of emergent or hybrid genres."
COMS 319 "Media Literacy " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course focuses on the critical evaluation of media including the examination of audiences, contents, and producers. The possible literacies may include media effects, digital media, news and popular media. Students closely examine the main dimensions of media literacy including access, analysis, creation, reflection, and action."
COMS 324 "Communication Analysis of Environment" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course analyzes communicational aspects of various sites such as museums, galleries, exhibitions, countrysides, landscapes, city streets, highways, department stores, and churches. These analyses are conducted from perspectives such as film locations work, interpretive writing, cultural studies, and soundscape research. Students take part in individual and group analyses of Montreal locations. Lectures, tutorials, and workshops."
COMS 325 "Approaches to Communication Research" "Prerequisite: Registration in Communication and Cultural Studies Major; COMS 225. This course introduces students to the logics of inquiry of the major research approaches used within Communication and Cultural Studies. It familiarizes students with the formation of research questions, the choice of appropriate methodological tools, and the interpretation and reporting of research findings. There is a particular focus on qualitative approaches to field research and discourse and textual analysis."
COMS 333 "Games, Media and Culture" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course takes a critical approach to understanding the role of games as media and cultural objects. Students explore how to make sense of games, both as scholars and as players. The course offers ample opportunities for students to play, discuss, and experiment with games themselves, as well as with media about games."
COMS 352 "Media Policy in Canada" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course acquaints the student with the historical development of media policy in Canada. It examines the government regulation of media as well as the strategies that have been put in place to foster and guide the development of media and cultural industries. It also considers the present state of broadcasting, telecommunications, and Internet policies in Canada, focusing on current problems and exploring alternative solutions."
COMS 354 "Youth and Media" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course explores the forms of communication that have developed between media and youth, including children and adolescents. Topical areas include future policies and planning in the light of developmental needs, ethical parameters, and experiments in creative empowerment."
COMS 355 "Media and New Technology" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the applications of computers in the field of communications from conceptual, theoretical, and practical perspectives. Analog and digital representation, transmission, storage, and processing of visual and aural information are discussed."
COMS 357 "Media and Critical Theory" "Prerequisite: See N.B number (1). This course focuses on key authors and readings in critical theory, including the work of the Frankfurt School, British Cultural Studies, structuralism, post-structuralism, and contemporary continental philosophy. A central concern is to understand the nature of power in the modern media environment."
COMS 360 "Mass Media" "The course examines the nature and forms of mass media, its social sources and uses, audiences, and effects. Issues such as media ownership and access, government and self-regulation, technological implications, ethics and accountability may be discussed."
COMS 361 "Propaganda" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course offers a critical understanding of the concept of propaganda and analyzes its historical development and contemporary impact on peoples lives. It also explores its various manifestations in society, politics, and culture and the methods of identifying its different forms."
COMS 362 "Psychology of Communication" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). The objectives of the course are to provide the learner with: 1) an overview of psychological processes active in the communicative act; 2) the opportunity to explore a single media area in depth, either independently or in a small group. Through a variety of formats, topic areas such as the following are explored: perception and information processing, language development, areas of para-psychology related to communication, influences on attitude/behaviour, verbal/non-verbal codes, and meaning."
COMS 365 "History of Sound Recording" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course traces the technological development of sound recording and establishes the historical context and the social and economic conditions in which this development has occurred. The evolution of studio recording practices, the structure of the music industry and its global operations, changes in the production and consumption of music, and changes in the role of music as a form of cultural communication are examined. Attention is also given to sound recording practices in cinema, radio, television and digital media."
COMS 367 "Media and Cultural Context" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the contested notions of culture and diversity as they relate to interpersonal and mediated communication. It focuses on ways in which different cultural communities critique and access a range of cultural forms, on issues and challenges of cross-cultural communications, and on media representational practices, challenges, and problematics."
COMS 368 "Media and Gender" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course investigates how sex and gender are represented in and by the media. The course examines sexuality, sexism, and theories of gender through a critical examination of contemporary media topics."
COMS 369 "Visual Communication and Culture" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course introduces the basic principles of visual forms of communication, and considers the relationship of visual and verbal components within media messages. It also presents various modes of visual communication, considers their place within cultural understandings of representation, and examines the place of the visual within contemporary culture."
COMS 370 "Advertising and the Consumer Culture" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course critically examines the place of advertising in contemporary society. Topics may include the analysis of communication strategies, the construction of desire, the significance of advertising to the production and circulation of commodities, and the role of advertising and consumption in the construction of social identity."
COMS 371 "Public Relations: Principles and Problems" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course considers the principles and responsibilities of public relations, and critically examines specific problems and the role of media choices and practices in effecting solutions."
COMS 372 "Theories of Public Discourse" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course presents a variety of theoretical frameworks that inform the analysis of public communication. Emphasis is placed on cultural, political, and ideological interpretations. Concepts presented are drawn from a number of traditions including rhetoric, hermeneutics, post-structuralism, psychoanalysis, semiotics, and deconstruction."
COMS 373 "Topics in Media and Cultural History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course offers an in-depth examination of specific periods or issues in media and cultural history. Selected topics focus on the development of media forms or cultural practices, as well as their social and political consequences. Historiographic research methods and theories are addressed."
COMS 374 "Communication Media: Intermedia II" "Prerequisite: COMS 274; permission of the Department. This course provides further theoretical and applied exploration of intermedia art and media practices such as remediation, design, animation, interactivity, installation, and performance. General emphasis on creative process, and proof-of-concept media creations, rather than finished media productions."
COMS 376 "Communication Media: Sound II" "Prerequisite: COMS 276; permission of the Department. This course explores acoustic communication, focusing on audio production techniques associated with various media, including radio, film, video, television, music recording, and intermedia. Students develop technical skills in sound creation and a critical awareness of the social and historical contexts of sound production and reception."
COMS 384 "Communication Media: Moving Images II" "Prerequisite: COMS 284; permission of the Department. This course explores aesthetic, critical, and technical issues of moving images through the development of artistic voice, concept, and audience. Students explore visual and aural strategies through collaborative projects and hone skills in camera, lighting, sound and editing."
COMS 393 "Communication Media: Special Topics" "Prerequisite: COMS 274, 276 or 284; submission of a portfolio and project proposal to instructor and permission of the Department. This course involves the development and creation of specialized projects in selected media genres and forms. Emphasis is placed upon conception, design, and execution of media works. Choice of media and types of forms and genres vary from year to year. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
COMS 394 "Communication Studies Apprenticeship I" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1); registration in a Communication Studies program; permission of the Department. With approval from the BA program director, students are given the opportunity to work in the communications industry under the co-supervision of a faculty member and a media professional. Students may be accepted for an open apprenticeship position offered to the Department, or they may formulate a study proposal on their own initiative. In order to receive credit, such an apprenticeship proposal must be approved by the BA program director."
COMS 395 "Communication Studies Apprenticeship II" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1); registration in a Communication Studies program; permission of the Department."
COMS 398 "Selected Topics in Communication Studies" ""
COMS 399 "Selected Topics in Communication Studies" ""
COMS 407 "Advanced Scriptwriting for Media" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2); COMS 307; submission of a sample of creative writing and subsequent approval by the instructor. This course provides an in-depth approach to writing for specific media. Emphasis is placed upon structure, storytelling, research, and the interplay of character and action. Different paradigms for both fiction and non-fiction are considered."
COMS 410 "Acoustic Communication and Design" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course investigates contemporary theories of acoustic communication and design, such as Attalis concept of noise, Schaeffers theory of the sound object, Schafers concept of soundscape, Chions cinema for the ear, and Augoyards repertoire of sound effects. Students engage in critical analysis of selected sound texts from various media."
COMS 411 "Sexuality and Public Discourse " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course analyzes and explores the ways sexuality circulates in and as public discourses. Through a variety of conceptual formations and critical conceptualizations of the public and sexuality, this course analyzes conceptually and critically how sexuality and the notion of the public are mutually constitutive. The seminar is interdisciplinary and draws upon works in feminist studies, queer theory, political philosophy, history, cultural studies, and communication theory."
COMS 412 "Discourses of Dissent " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines the forms and tactics of public discourses directed toward social change. Forms of public discourse that may be considered include speech, images, audiovisual works, as well as web-based sites or forms of communication. Emphasis is placed upon political protest, conflict and controversy, and mobilization. Themes explored include the development of speaking positions, the use of unconventional tactics, and the appropriation or rejection of received values."
COMS 413 "Cultures of Production " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Drawing on a range of recent field studies exploring the creative workplace (e.g. television production, the fashion industry, ad agencies, graphic design companies, the music business), this course frames commercial cultural production as a site of active agency, negotiation, and constraint through readings, discussion, and the design and execution of field research projects."
COMS 414 "Production Administration " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course focuses on the language, skills, and strategies necessary for producing media projects and events. Administration, organization, permits and permissions, fundraising, liability and contracts, team-building, distribution and writing are just a few of the areas that are examined as students learn the skills necessary to be a producer."
COMS 415 "Advanced Topics in the Photographic Image " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course explores the themes and concerns associated with particular photographic practices. Through class discussion, visual materials, readings, and writing projects, students develop a critical understanding of the history, language, and aesthetics of the photographic image."
COMS 416 "Advanced Media Criticism" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course explores the assumptions, methodologies, and vocabularies implicit in important schools of popular and academic media criticism across mulitiple media forms."
COMS 418 "Cultures of Globalization" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines the significance of communication technologies to the process of globalization, which has increased and accelerated the movement of people and commodities across the world. The resulting transnational networks of cultural, economic, political, and social linkages and alliances are considered, as is the role of media in engendering new forms of community and identity."
COMS 419 "Communications and Indigenous Peoples" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Focusing on Canadian First Peoples territories in the North and South, as well as selected circumpolar regions, such as parts of Australia and other areas of the world inhabited by indigenous peoples, this course examines from a global perspective the historical, theoretical, and cross-cultural content and contexts of aboriginal media financing, audience research, product development, distribution issues, and policy formation. Broadcasting, print, and digital media case studies and materials are central components."
COMS 420 "Reception Studies" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines recent theory and research trends in the area of media reception studies and audience agency. Topics may include discursive, institutional, observational, and ethnographic approaches through readings, discussion, and the design and execution of field research projects."
COMS 421 "Communicative Performances and Interventions" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines how media can be used in order to intervene in social and cultural issues. Emphasis is placed upon the performative character of interventions: they occur at a particular time and in a particular place, they are addressed to and seek to move particular audiences. Topics may include the history of performance strategies, the social and political character of aesthetic interventions, and the forms of such performances in relation to various media of communication."
COMS 422 "Perspectives on the Information Society" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course critically examines the political, social, and ethical dimensions of the information society within Canada and throughout the world. The development of the information society is placed in a socio-historical context. The significance of information and communication technologies is considered and the role of global information and communication policies is examined."
COMS 423 "Media Art and Aesthetics" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines the aesthetic principles pertinent to the analysis and creation of works within communication media. Topics may include the field of perception, the role of cognition, the elements of composition, and the interplay of form and meaning. Both the static and dynamic aspects of visual and aural elements are considered."
COMS 424 "Alternative Media" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines various alternatives to mainstream media. These alternatives may include community radio and video, independent film, the Internet, and other emergent cultural forms such as the pastiche and parody of culture jamming. The concepts of mainstream and alternative are explored and the relationship between alternative media and social practices is considered."
COMS 425 "Advanced Seminar in Cultural Studies" "Prerequisite: Registration in the Communication and Cultural Studies Major; see N.B. number (2). This course offers an intense examination of a prominent contemporary debate and/or issue in cultural studies. Students work toward the completion of a major research assignment."
COMS 426 "Television Studies" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines recent research focusing on television. Topics may include technological and industrial changes, audience activity, new genres, and representational conventions."
COMS 427 "Social Media Platforms and Policy" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course critically examines the cultures, economics and affordances of social media platforms. The development of social media platforms is also discussed in order to understand how global flows of technology and culture converge. This course also examines platform policy and governance."
COMS 434 "Advanced Topics in Film Studies" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course provides an in-depth study of a selected area of film studies. Specific topics for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
COMS 435 "Advanced Topics in Documentary" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course provides an in-depth study of selected film, video, sound and interactive documentary genres. Specific topics for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
COMS 437 "Media Forecast" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines trends in film, sound, television, and other media for future applications. The course includes theory of media effects. Representatives from industry and government are invited to discuss future trends in media utilization. The course demands a theoretical and practical model for original or novel use of a medium or media mix."
COMS 453 "Communication Ethics" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course allows students to confront issues of creative responsibility and ethical dilemmas in media practice. Emphasis is placed upon the relationship between production and theory at the level of ethical responsibility. Specific issues include ethical theories as applied to media, communication and information; the relationship of human values and technologies of information reproduction; the possibilities of critical media practice; identification of challenges emerging from experience in Communication Studies."
COMS 455 "Food, Media and Culture " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Food and water are essential to life and inform the articulation of identities, values, and cultures. This course addresses the critical role communication plays in framing contemporary food issues. Students develop skills to critically analyze the narratives and metaphors that scholars, artists, communication experts, educators, and activists draw on when addressing food, water and environmental concerns."
COMS 456 "News, Media and Power " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). The course explores how news is produced within systems of media and power, and examines the technologies and conventions that govern its production and dissemination. The class may explore in greater detail a particular facet of, or problem in, the news media system, its production or dissemination."
COMS 460 "Political Communication" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). The relationships between forms of communication and political structures and processes are examined. Topics include freedom of expression, the role of communication in mediating conflict, the place of deliberation and debate in democracy, political campaigns and advertising, and the relationship between styles of communication and models of governance."
COMS 461 "Organizational Communication" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course considers major approaches to organizational communication in relation to shifting patterns of power, inequality, and technological change. Topics include communication networks, organization culture, bureaucracy, systematically distorted communication, gendered communication, the impact of new communication technologies, and patterns of organizational dominance and resistance. Case studies of particular organizations are examined."
COMS 462 "Communication, Culture, and Popular Art" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course offers an advanced examination of popular culture. With attention to such phenomena as hit films and television shows, stars, fans, and pop art, this course focuses on the formation of hierarchies of value in cultural forms. This course examines how some cultural products come to be celebrated while others are dismissed. It also considers social and political consequences of divisions of high and low culture."
COMS 463 "Semiotics" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course provides a detailed introduction to the semiotics of communication. The course considers the formal characteristics of signs and codes and examines how signs or texts produce meaning. Central to this course is the notion that sign-systems are fundamental to the production of knowledge and ideology. The course proceeds through lectures, an analytical reading of assigned texts, and student discussion and presentations."
COMS 464 "Race, Ethnicity and Media" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course addresses practical and theoretical issues of race and ethnicity that have become focal points for current debates in public cultural expression and media studies. The following themes are discussed: cultural/racial difference and its implications for media studies; the (mis)representation of multicultural and multiracial minorities in mainstream and alternative media; questions of access to arts and other cultural funding sources; implications of employment equity legislation in light of media budget cuts; and cross-cultural awareness programs vs. anti-racist training for media professionals. Theoretical readings which frame issues of cultural and racial representation are an integral part of this course."
COMS 465 "Rhetoric and Communication" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course focuses upon communication as persuasive or as producing identification. Emphasis is placed upon the role of communication in civic affairs. Classical and contemporary approaches to rhetorical theory and criticism are examined."
COMS 468 "Communications, Development and Colonialism" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course discusses the role media can play in indigenous and international development. The concept of development communications is examined in the context of debates within neo-colonial and post-colonial theories."
COMS 472 "Communication Technologies and Gender" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Feminist theories of communication technologies are used to critique the impact and meanings of these technologies in various spheres of cultural activity. Topics include the mass media, technological mediations in organizations and institutions, and the re-articulation of domestic and public spaces, such as the Internet and the World Wide Web. Special attention is paid to these electronic and digital technologies  or new media  and the communicational and representational possibilities they enable or foreclose. The class is conducted as an intensive seminar. Completion of a prior course in womens studies or gender studies at the university level is recommended."
COMS 473 "International Communication" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course explores historical and current parameters of international communications within the context of current global shifts in power/knowledge relations. Discussion topics are selected from among the following: key development and neo-colonial theories, cultural/media imperialism, globalization, the UN infrastructure, the Right to Communicate debates, national sovereignty issues, international broadcasting, cross-cultural audience reception research and effects theories, telediplomacy, the World Wide Web and the Internet, women as an international constituency group, and others."
COMS 475 "Communication Media: Intermedia III" "Prerequisite: COMS 374; permission of the Department. This advanced course in intermedia theory and practice involves further engagement with analog and digital media, such as remediation, design, animation, interactivity, installation, and performance. The course emphasizes concept, process, and polish in the development of a portfolio-level work."
COMS 477 "Communication Media: Sound III" "Prerequisite: COMS 376; permission of the Department. This advanced course involves analysis and creation of substantial audio projects such as sound documentaries, song cycles, soundscape projects, multi-layered soundtracks, and audio installations. Emphasis is placed on creative portfolio development and public presentation."
COMS 484 "Communication Media: Moving Images III" "Prerequisite: COMS 384; permission of the Department. This course emphasizes the development of portfolio-quality creative work in moving images with a focus on cinematography, sound design, editing, distribution, aesthetic and critical aspects of digital moving image production and the professional field."
COMS 491 "Communication Media: Portfolio" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of any second-year production course; permission of the Department. This advanced production course offers a sustained opportunity to develop one or more portfolio-quality media productions, either individually or in groups. Other topics may include CV design, grant-writing, and professional development."
COMS 493 "Communication Media: Advanced Topics" "Prerequisite: COMS 374, 376 or 385; submission of portfolio and project proposal to instructor and permission of the Department. This course involves the development and creation of specialized projects in selected media genres and forms. Emphasis is placed upon conception, design, and execution of media works. Choice of media and types of forms and genres vary from year to year. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
COMS 496 "Directed Study I" "Prerequisite: Registration in a Communication Studies program. Towards the end of their second year, students enrolled in a Communication Studies program who have demonstrated scholarly and creative ability may be selected for major research or production in a communications area of special interest. During the third year, individually or in teams, the project is realized in close collaboration with faculty directors."
COMS 497 "Directed Study II" "Prerequisite: Registration in a Communication Studies program."
COMS 498 "Advanced Topics in Communication Studies" ""
COMS 499 "Advanced Topics in Communication Studies" ""
CWT 101 "" "Students are enrolled in this course concurrently with their first work term. This is a forum for critically examining the workplace, for reflecting on personal work-term experiences, for building and testing hypotheses, for disciplined inquiry, and for setting goals. Activities provide opportunities for students to connect their work-term experiences to their related courses."
CWT 201 "" "Students are enrolled in this course concurrently with their second work term. Using one or more of the techniques listed in CWT 101, this course expands on students second work-term experiences in their related field of study to further develop their knowledge and work-related skills."
CWT 301 "" "Students are enrolled in this course concurrently with their third work term. Using one or more of the techniques listed in CWT 101, this course expands on students third work-term experiences in their related field of study to further develop their knowledge and work-related skills."
CWT 401 "" "Students are enrolled in this course concurrently with their fourth work term. Using one or more of the techniques listed in CWT 101, this course expands on students fourth work-term experiences in their related field of study to further develop their knowledge and work-related skills."
DANC201  "Creative Process I " "Prerequisite: Appropriate technique course (DANC205 [210], 305 [310], or 405 [410], as determined by the Department) concurrently; enrolment in the Major in Contemporary Dance, or written permission of the Department. Introduction to the creative process in dance. Students learn to explore, observe, and structure ideas and movements through improvisations and specific exercises which cover such fundamentals as kinetics, rhythm and dynamics, spatial organization, perceptual skills, integration of acoustic, visual and verbal elements, and the use of technology as a creative tool. In addition to the regular studio hours, students must attend two hours of laboratory each week."
DANC 205 "Technique I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Contemporary Dance, or written permission of the Department. Emphasis is placed on the proper alignment and placement of the body in stillness and in motion. Integration and execution of movement fundamentals and sequences are taught as a preparation for dance."
DANC 211 "Dance Traditions" "A survey of the history of dance, including relations between modernism, postmodernism, and beyond. Support material may include slides and videos, and bibliographies of specific topics. The course is also designed to provide opportunities for personal and critical reflection and stimulation for contemplating ideas related to dance."
DANC 240* "Principles of Contemporary Dance" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Contemporary Dance. A survey of technical skills, improvisation, and dance composition. Studio: four hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
DANC 250 "Aspects of Production for Dance" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Contemporary Dance, or written permission of the Department. This course provides students with a forum for exploration, experimentation, and for study of process and principles of technical production in the performing arts. Students learn the basic techniques of creationbased production as well as the practical skills used in the successful application of technical theory. Topics may include costume, makeup, audiovisual support and documentation as wellas the use of current technologies within the context of the creative and choreographic process of contemporary dance."
DANC 260 "Sound and Silence for the Dancer" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Contemporary Dance, or written permission of the Department of Contemporary Dance. The basics of music theory through guided analytical text using singing, single line score reading and moving, including the study of rhythm, melody, harmony, tempi, dynamics, tone colour, and musical forms with emphasis on the fundamental understanding of rhythm, melody, and harmony physically and mentally."
DANC 261 "Summer Workshop in Dance I" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Contemporary Dance. Sequences of studio sessions which may include body movement, improvisation, performance technique, and choreography. Studio: four hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
DANC 262 "Summer Workshop in Dance II" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Contemporary Dance. A continuation ofDANC 261. Studio: four hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
DANC 301 "Creative Process II" "Prerequisite: Appropriate technique course (DANC205 [210], 305 [310], or 405 [410], as determined by the Department) and DANC320 concurrently; DANC200 or 201; and enrolment in the Major in Contemporary Dance, or written permission of the Department. A continuation of DANC200. Students further develop the practical and theoretical aspects of the creative process indance and the elaboration of an individualized kinetic language. Methods of research and their application to concepts, themes, collaborations, projects, and the use of technology are evolved in studio and laboratories. In addition to the regular studio hours, students must attend two hours of laboratory each week."
DANC 305 "Technique II" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Contemporary Dance, or written permission of the Department. Emphasis is placed on the technical development of suppleness, strength, coordination, rhythm, and kinetic fundamentals. Locomotor patterns, spatial relations, and phrasing are formulated into movement sequences to prepare the students for dance."
DANC320 0 "Choreography I" "Prerequisite: Appropriate technique course (DANC205 [210], 305 [310], or 405 [410], as determined by the Department) andDANC300 or 301 concurrently; enrolment in the Major in Contemporary Dance, or written permission of the Department. Choreography is the art of rendering a concept into the physical design of dance through movement and forms of notation. This course develops personal creativity and broadens the students physical and expressive potential into public performances. By organizing movement, space, and time into dances, students follow through the stages of originating ideas, developing themes, and rehearsing and performing choreographic creations. The course also explores the role that technology plays within both the choreographic and production processes. Practical exercises provide students with a working knowledge in the use of video, sound manipulation, and stage lighting."
DANC 330 "Principles of Anatomy and Body Movement" "Prerequisite: DANC 205 (210), and written permission of the Department of Contemporary Dance. A workshop of movement fundamentals based on the practical understanding of anatomy and dance technique. Studio: six hours per week."
DANC 350 "Practical Anatomy for the Moving Body" "An introduction to human anatomy in relation to movement and dance. The study of skeletal structure and the function of muscles and joints for proper alignment."
DANC 398 "Special Topics in Dance" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Contemporary Dance. Topics vary from year to year, taking into account the special aptitudes of instructors and students. Studio: six hours."
DANC 401 "Creative Process III" "Prerequisite: Appropriate technique class (DANC205 [210], 305 [310], or 405 [410], as determined by the Department) and DANC420 concurrently; enrolment in the Major in Contemporary Dance, or written permission of the Department. A continuation of DANC301 (300). This course enables students to advance their creative process and practice as movement artists through kinetic exploration, improvisation, performance coaching, extended studio projects, and lab reports. Discussion of current artistic issues and cultural manifestations help students situate their own research within a diversity of contexts. Building on initial research carried out in DANC301 (300), further exploration is conducted into the use of technology within the creative process. In addition to the regular studio hours, students must attend two hours of laboratory each week."
DANC 405 "Technique III" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Contemporary Dance, or written permission of the Department. Emphasis is placed on refining and consolidating the students practical understanding of kinetics in relation to placement, locomotion, movement patterns, dynamics, and phrasing. Students refine their perceptual and memory skills, and learn to integrate more complex movement notions to support interpretation in dance."
DANC 420 "Choreography II" "Prerequisite: Appropriate technique class (DANC205 [210], 305 [310], or 405 [410], as determined by the Department) and DANC401 (400) or 405 (410) concurrently; enrolment in the Major in Contemporary Dance, or written permission of the Department. Building on initial research carried out in DANC 320, further exploration is conducted into the use of technology withinthe choreographic process as well as an examination of the role that it plays in all aspects of production. This course expands on various approaches to choreography through movement research, discussion and theory, extended studio assignments, rehearsal management, and production. Students also examine the role of the choreographer in social, political, andartistic contexts. Students are expected to produce work for public performance."
DANC 441 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. Students who have completed advanced choreography courses or the equivalent have the opportunity of carrying out a project of independent study. Subject matter must deal with specific aspects ofcontemporary dance. Tutorials with the project advisor are mandatory."
DANC 442 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Contemporary Dance. A student repeating DANC 441 registers for credit under DANC 442."
DANC 499 "Topics in Dance" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Contemporary Dance. Advanced choreography where movement shares equal emphasis with all other arts developed into multimedia theatre. Studio: four hours per week. Practice laboratory: two hours per week. Rehearsal: four hours per week."
EAST 200 "ASA and Aural Skills I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an Electroacoustic program. Based upon concepts articulated in Auditory Scene Analysis (ASA), this intensive fundamental eartraining course is integrated with electroacoustics and music technology through composition. It offers a focused study of sound, acoustic and psychoacoustic, designed to develop the inner and outer ear. Directpractical application studies in sonic and musical dictation and creation fosters expanded and refined hearing."
EAST 203 "Digital Audio Editing" "An introduction to the study and practice of the Acousmatic and Sound Art tradition through the use of the computer as a manipulation platform and creative environment for the exploration of sound. This course includes historical and aesthetic aspectsof the art. Classic and contemporary electroacoustic techniques are explored as are applications of electroacoustics in popular music. Related topics in acoustics, psychoacoustics, hearing, and audio technology are covered in order to provide a background for effective work in the digital environment."
EAST 205 "Electroacoustics I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an Electroacoustic program. A seminar/workshop in electroacoustics introducing composition through analysis and directed studies involving recording, editing, processing of analog and digital signals, a full introduction to live and mixed electroacoustic composition, and modular analog synthesis, all in a multichannel environment."
EAST 211 "Theory/MIDIstrationI" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an Electroacoustic program. An intensive course of music theory in practice, integrating electroacoustics and music technology through composition. Foundation music skills development takes place in a creative and technological environment using software sequencers (MIDI and audio), and music notation programs. Fundamental music training is provided through exercises and composition using instrument sampling software. References are drawn from contemporary and crosscultural practices."
EAST 231 "Sound For Artists" "This course is an introduction to the study and creation of sound for artistic contexts. It includes historical and aesthetic aspects of sound utilizing current computer and studiobased technologies. Basics of sound recording, editing, and processing are covered, as well as creative applications in installation and performance art, electronic arts, and screenbased practices. Spoken word, music (electronically/digitally generated), everyday sound and mechanically produced sounds are explored. Related topics in acoustics, hearing, and the theoretical concepts central to sound art are also introduced, in order to provide a background for effective and informed work with sound in a students art practice."
EAST 251 "Introduction to RecordingI" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an Electroacoustic program. This introductory course provides an overview of analog and digital audio technology with attention to its innovations, history, and effect on the practice of sound recording and involves a classroombased study of issues related to sound recording."
EAST 252 "Introduction to RecordingII" "Prerequisite: EAST 251. A continuation of EAST251."
EAST 298 "Special Topics in Electroacoustics" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A study of selected topics in electroacoustics."
EAST 299 "Special Topics in Electroacoustics " "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A study of selected topics in electroacoustics."
EAST 300 "ASA and Aural SkillsII " "Prerequisite: EAST 200. This course is a continuation of EAST 200 based upon the principles of auditory scene analysis and critical listening. It extends the development of fundamental aural skills critical to students in electroacoustics. The course integrates electroacoustic analysis with music technology through detailed study of representative electroacoustic works. A number of digital studio techniques, such as envelopes, EQ, compression, reverb, and time stretching/pitch shifting, are also studied in this context."
EAST 305 "Electroacoustics II" "Prerequisite: EAST 205 or enrolment in the Specialization in Electroacoustic Creative Practices. A seminar/workshop in electroacoustics with continued work in fixed media, live, mixed and interdisciplinary composition, and sound design."
EAST 310 "Theory/MIDIstrationII " "Prerequisite: EAST 211. A continuation of the foundation musical skills development of EAST211."
EAST 331 "Sound Art Practices " "An intermediatelevel sound art theory and production course focusing onindividual or collaborative sound projects for artistic contexts such as installation and performance art, electronic arts, and screenbased practices. This course also addresses relevant reading and theoretical background."
EAST 351 "Intermediate Sound RecordingI " "Prerequisite: EAST 252. An intensive seminar/workshop studying the techniques used to record and edit music in settings ranging from live concert performances to studio session recordings. Handson experience and aural perception is developed during ensemble rehearsal and recording sessions. Emphasis is placed on production topics such as multitrack recording, microphone placement systems, and audio processes. An understanding is developed of the language of music through basic music appreciation skills as they relate to recording and editing of music."
EAST 352 "Intermediate Sound RecordingII " "Prerequisite: EAST 351. A continuation of EAST351."
EAST 361 "Current Sound Practice Seminar " "Prerequisite: EAST 305 previously or concurrently. Topics vary from year to year, but may include such elements as sound design, glitch, noise, microsound, plunderphonics, collage, and game sound."
EAST 362 "Virtual Modular Synthesis " "Prerequisite: EAST 305 previously or concurrently. A detailed study of selected digital synthesis techniques."
EAST 363 "Concordia Laptop Orchestra I (CLOrk) " "Prerequisite: EAST 305 previously or concurrently. The Concordia Laptop Orchestra specializes in networked and interdisciplinary creation and performance. It performs physically and telematically with ensembles and soloists worldwide."
EAST 365 "Multichannel Composition: Sound and Spaces " "Prerequisite: EAST 305 previously or concurrently. Aseminar workshop on composition for four or more channels. The topics may include fixed media presentations, sound projection techniques, and multichannel installation art. Topics vary from year to year."
EAST 398 "Special Topics in Electroacoustics" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in electroacoustics."
EAST 399 "Special Topics in Electroacoustics" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in electroacoustics."
EAST 406 "Electroacoustic Composition Seminar/Workshop I" "Prerequisite: EAST 305. A seminar/workshop with a focus on composition for advanced students in electroacoustics. Students areencouraged to include an interdisciplinary component in their final project."
EAST 407 "Electroacoustic Composition Seminar/Workshop II" "Prerequisite: EAST 406. A continuation of EAST406."
EAST 451 "Advanced RecordingI" "Prerequisite: EAST 352. A continuation of EAST352. Emphasis is on advanced independent projects."
EAST 452 "Advanced RecordingII" "Prerequisite: EAST 451. A continuation of EAST451."
EAST 461 "Capstone Project SeminarI " "Prerequisite: EAST 406; 60 credits completed. An advanced, open seminar/workshop environment where students are encouraged to work on individual projects, and in a collaborative, crossdisciplinary or multicultural fashion."
EAST 462 "Capstone Project SeminarII " "Prerequisite: EAST 461. Acontinuation of EAST461."
EAST 463 "Concordia Laptop Orchestra II (CLOrk) " "Prerequisite: EAST 363. A continuation of EAST 363."
EAST 465 "Capstone Recording Project I " "Prerequisite: EAST 452 previously or concurrently. An open workshop where students engage in intensive studies in applied recording arts. Students are expected to collaborate with other musicians from the Department of Music."
EAST 466 "Capstone Recording Project II " "Prerequisite: EAST 465; 60 credits completed. An open workshop where students engage in intensive studies in applied recording arts. Students are expected to collaborate with other musicians from the Department of Music."
EAST 471* "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 60 credits completed and written permission of the Department of Music. A studentdesigned course of study, approved by an advisor, that focuses on an area of electroacoustics."
EAST 472* "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: EAST 471 and written permission of the Department of Music."
EAST 481 "Supervised Internship I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an Electroacoustic program; 60 credits completed; written permission of the Department of Music. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for soundfocused work completed for a recognized organization, or a soundfocused project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a fulltime faculty member."
EAST 482 "Supervised Internship II" "Prerequisite: EAST 481 and written permission of the Department of Music. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for soundfocused work completed for a recognized organization, or a soundfocused project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a fulltime faculty member."
EAST 498 "Special Topics in Electroacoustics" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. An advanced study of a selected area not available in other courses in electroacoustics."
EAST 499 "Special Topics in Electroacoustics" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. An advanced study of a selected area not available in other courses in electroacoustics."
JAZZ 200 "The Language of Jazz" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Jazz Studies or written permission of the Department of Music. An introduction to the syntax, style, aesthetics, and sociology of jazz. The complete spectrum of styles and artists serves as the basis of materials for the course. Listening, readings/discussion, aural transcription, performance analysis, repertoire development, instrumental or vocal performance and film study constitute the core work."
JAZZ 209 "Jazz Aural Perception I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Jazz Studies or written permission of the Department of Music. A course designed to develop the jazz musical ear at an intermediate level. Classroom and laboratory."
JAZZ 210 "Jazz Aural Perception II" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 209 or equivalent. A continuation of the development of the jazz musical ear. Classroom and laboratory."
JAZZ 251 "Rhythm and Melody" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Jazz Studies or written permission of the Department of Music. An introduction to the elements of jazz rhythmic and melodic construction."
JAZZ 252 "Jazz Harmony I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Jazz Studies or written permission of the Department of Music. An introduction to the basic and intermediate principles of jazz harmonic progressions and voiceleading."
JAZZ 298 "Special Topics in Jazz Studies" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in jazz studies."
JAZZ 303 "Jazz Arranging I" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 251, 252. The study of writing arrangements based upon compositions from the American popular song and jazz repertoires for small and mediumsize jazz ensembles."
JAZZ 304 "Jazz Arranging II" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 303. Building on JAZZ 303, the study ofwriting arrangements for large ensembles including original compositions and jazz repertoire."
JAZZ 305 "Jazz Composition I" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 252. A seminar/workshop in jazz composition. After an examination of components of composition from the jazz repertoire, students write original music based on the blues, American popular song forms, and such idioms as those in the style of bebop, bossa nova, ragtime, and modal jazz."
JAZZ 311 "Jazz Aural Perception III " "Prerequisite: JAZZ 210 or equivalent. A continuation of jazz aural perception development at an advanced level. Classroom and laboratory."
JAZZ 351 "Jazz Harmony II " "Prerequisite: JAZZ 252. A continuation of the study of harmonic progressions and voiceleading with reference to a variety of styles and time periods, studied through analysis and composition."
JAZZ 352 "Jazz Analysis " "Prerequisite: JAZZ 351. An introduction to analytical techniques relating to form, motivic development, and texture, with reference to a variety of styles and time periods."
JAZZ 398 "Special Topics in Jazz Studies" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200 or exemption, and written permission of the Department of Music. A seminar/workshop in an area of music which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of jazz outside the scope of existing courses."
JAZZ 399 "Special Topics in Jazz Studies" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200 or exemption, and written permission of the Department of Music. A seminar/workshop in an area of music which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of jazz outside the scope of existing courses."
JAZZ 400 "Jazz Studies Capstone Seminar and Project" "Prerequisite: 60 credits completed in the BFA Specialization in Jazz Studies. Students design, implement and present advanced individual or collaborative projects in any area of jazz studies."
JAZZ 405 "Jazz Composition II" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 305. A continuation of JAZZ305."
JAZZ 471** "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: Secondyear standing*, and written permission of the Department of Music. A studentdesigned course of study, approved byan advisor, that focuses on an area of jazz studies."
JAZZ 472** "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 471, secondyear standing*, and written permission of the Department of Music. A studentdesigned course of study, approved by an advisor, that focuses on an area of jazz studies."
JAZZ 481 "Supervised Internship I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Jazz Studies; 60 credits completed; written permission of the Department of Music. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for work completed for a recognized jazzrelated organization, or a project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a fulltime faculty member."
JAZZ 482 "Supervised Internship II" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 481; written permission of the Department of Music. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for work completed for a recognized jazzrelated organization, or a project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a fulltime faculty member."
JAZZ 498 "Special Topics in Jazz Studies" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200 or exemption, and written permission of the Department of Music. An advanced seminar/workshop in an area of music which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of jazz outside the scope of existing courses."
JAZZ 499 "Special Topics in Jazz Studies" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200 or exemption, and written permission of the Department of Music. An advanced seminar/workshop in an area of music which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of jazz outside the scope of existing courses."
JHIS 314 "Jazz History" "A study of the historical developments and the personalities that contributed to the evolution of jazz styles."
JHIS 351 "The Ellington Era" "Prerequisite: JHIS 314 or MHIS 314. The study of the life and music of Edward Kennedy Duke Ellington."
JHIS 352 "American Popular Song" "Prerequisite: JHIS 314 or MHIS 314. A survey of the composers, lyricists, and performers of American popular song from 1900 to 1950 through the study of works by masters of the genre such as Gershwin, Porter, Berlin, and Arlen."
JHIS 353 "The Modern Jazz Orchestra" "Prerequisite: JHIS 314 or MHIS 314. A survey of big band jazz music from 1943 to the present, beginning with Duke Ellingtons epic composition Black, Brown and Beige."
JHIS 354 "The Music of Charles Mingus" "Prerequisite: JHIS 314 or MHIS 314. The study of the life and music of Charles Mingus."
JHIS 398 "Special Topics in Jazz History" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. This course provides an opportunity for the study of special topics in jazz history."
JHIS 471 "Jazz History Independent Study*" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. Students undertake independent research in jazz history under the supervision of a fulltime faculty member."
JHIS 498 "Special Topics in Jazz History" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. This course provides an opportunity for the study of special topics in jazz history."
JPER 223 "Big Band I" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200 previously or concurrently; permission of the Department of Music upon successful audition. Aperformance course in which students participate in the Big Band Jazz Ensemble."
JPER 224 "Eclectic Ensemble I" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200 previously or concurrently; permission of the Department of Music upon successful audition. A performance course in which students participate in the Eclectic Ensemble."
JPER 225 "Jazz Choir I" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200 previously or concurrently; permission of the Department of Music upon successful audition. A performance course in which students participate in the Jazz Choir."
JPER 251 "Jazz Private Study I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Jazz Studies and written permission of the Department of Music. This course offers individual vocal or instrumental instruction in jazz performance."
JPER 252 "Jazz Private Study II" "Prerequisite: JPER 251 and written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of JPER 251."
JPER 298 "Special Topics in Jazz Performance" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in jazz performance."
JPER 323 "Big Band II" "Prerequisite: JPER 223; permission of the Department of Music upon successful audition. A continuation of JPER 223."
JPER 324 "Eclectic Ensemble II" "Prerequisite: JPER 224; permission of the Department of Music upon successful audition. A continuation of JPER 224."
JPER 325 "Jazz Choir II" "Prerequisite: JPER 225; permission of the Department of Music upon successful audition. A continuation of JPER 225."
JPER 330 "Jazz Improvisation I" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200; JAZZ 252 previously or concurrently. A performanceanalysis course that examines the craft of jazz improvisation. A broad spectrum of jazz improvisational styles is examined. Participation in public performance is required."
JPER 341 "Jazz Vocal Repertoire I" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200; JPER 251, MUSI 231 or MPER 251 (voice) previously or concurrently. A study of jazz vocal technique through performance of representative compositions and arrangements, and study of professional recordings demonstrating various jazz vocal styles. Special focus is on performance styles and building audienceperformer relationships. Students are expected to participate in public performances."
JPER 351 "Jazz Private Study III" "Prerequisite: JPER 252; secondyear standing in the Specialization in Jazz Studies*; written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of JPER 252."
JPER 352 "Jazz Private Study IV" "Prerequisite: JPER 351 and written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of JPER 351."
JPER 398 "Special Topics in Jazz Performance" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200 or exemption, and written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in jazz performance."
JPER 399 "Special Topics in Jazz Performance" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200 or exemption, and written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in jazz performance."
JPER 423 "Big Band III" "Prerequisite: JPER 323; permission of the Department of Music upon successful audition. A continuation of JPER 323."
JPER 424 "Eclectic Ensemble III" "Prerequisite: JPER 324; permission of the Department of Music upon successful audition. A continuation of JPER 324."
JPER 425 "Jazz Choir III" "Prerequisite: JPER 325; permission of the Department of Music upon successful audition. A continuation of JPER 325."
JPER 430 "Jazz Improvisation II" "Prerequisite: JPER 330. A continuation of JPER330."
JPER 441 "Jazz Vocal Repertoire II" "Prerequisite: JPER 341. A continuation of JPER341."
JPER 451 "Jazz Private Study V" "Prerequisite: JPER 352; thirdyear standing in the Specialization in Jazz Studies*; written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of JPER 352."
JPER 452 "Jazz Private Study VI" "Prerequisite: JPER 451 and written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of JPER 451."
JPER 471** "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: Secondyear standing* or equivalent, and written permission of the Department of Music. A studentdesigned course of study, approved by an advisor, on an area of jazz performance practice. When appropriate, the study may include a performance."
JPER 472* "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: JPER 471 and written permission of the Department of Music. A student repeating JPER 471 registers for JPER 472 for credit."
JPER 498 "Special Topics in Jazz Performance" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200 or exemption, and written permission of the Department of Music. An advanced study of a selected area not available in other courses in jazz performance."
JPER 499 "Special Topics in Jazz Performance" "Prerequisite: JAZZ 200 or exemption, and written permission of the Department of Music. An advanced study of a selected area not available in other courses in jazz performance."
MHIS 203 "Music History to 1800" "A survey of musical styles in their social context to the end of the Classical period. While emphasis is on the mainstream of the Western tradition, attention is also given to folk and popular music, as well as to the music of diverse cultures."
MHIS 204 "Music History from 1800 to the Present" "A survey of musical styles in their social context, taken from the end of the Classical period to the present day. While emphasis is on the mainstream of the Western tradition, attention is also given to folk, popular, and jazz styles, as well as to the music of diverse cultures."
MHIS 221 "Rock and Roll and Its Roots" "A study of the history, traditions, styles, and musical trends of rock and roll."
MHIS 241 "From Phonograph to Streaming" "A lecture course focusing on the history and impact of sound from the loudspeaker."
MHIS 298 "Special Topics in Music History" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a program in the Department of Music or written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in music history."
MHIS 305 "Music from the PostRomantic to the Present" "Prerequisite: MHIS 203, 204. A study of music from the early20th century to the present. The roots of current trends in music are followed through their growth into the widely diverse styles of today."
MHIS 306 "Early Music Influences on Contemporary Creative Music Practices" "Prerequisite: MHIS 203, 204, or equivalent. This course studies in depth the influence of the Medieval, Renaissance, and early Baroque periods (broadly known as early music) on 20th and 21stcentury composers and creative practices in music. The course includes musicological inquiry and critical analysis, as well as speculative discussion of future trends."
MHIS 307 "Common Practice Influences on Contemporary Creative Music Practices" "Prerequisite: MHIS 203, 204, or equivalent. This course studies in depth the influence of the middle to high Baroque, Rococo, Classical and Romantic periods (broadly known as common practice) on 20th and 21stcentury composers and creative practices in music. The course includes historical, musicological, and critical analysis, as well as speculative discussion of future trends."
MHIS 314 "Jazz History" "A study of the historical developments and the personalities that contributed to the evolution of jazz styles."
MHIS 315 "Women in Music History" "Prerequisite: MHIS 203, 204; or written permission of the Department of Music. A study of womens contribution to music and the perception of womens roles in music history. This course explores both the historic and current situation of women in music through discussion of womens participation in musical life and the ways women are depicted in music. Topics are not limited to the Western art tradition only, but range widely through other cultures, raising issues such as ritual and lament, spirituality, power, and social class. Readings, listening, guests, and the students own experiences complement the lectures and discussions."
MHIS 331 "Aesthetics and Musical Styles" "Prerequisite: MHIS 203, 204. A survey and exploration of thought and writings on the meaning, intent, practice, and appreciation of music and its various manifestations in different cultures or eras, aiming to provide students with the tools and background to think deeply about the meaning and direction of musical language."
MHIS 351 "The Ellington Era" "Prerequisite: MHIS 314 or JHIS 314. The study of the life and music of Edward Kennedy Duke Ellington."
MHIS 352 "American Popular Song" "Prerequisite: MHIS 314 or JHIS 314. A survey of the composers, lyricists, and performers of American popular song from 1900 to 1950 through the study of works by masters of the genre such as Gershwin, Porter, Berlin, and Arlen."
MHIS 353 "The Modern Jazz Orchestra" "Prerequisite: MHIS 314 or JHIS 314. A survey of big band jazz music from 1943 to the present, beginning with Duke Ellingtons epic composition Black, Brown and Beige."
MHIS 354 "The Music of Charles Mingus" "Prerequisite: MHIS 314 or JHIS 314. The study of the life and music of Charles Mingus."
MHIS 398 "Special Topics in Music History" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in music history."
MHIS 471* "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A studentdesigned course of study that focuses on an approved area(s) of music history and/or related disciplines, and involves consultation with an advisor."
MHIS 472* "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A student repeating MHIS471 registers for MHIS 472 for credit."
MHIS 498 "Special Topics in Music History" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Music and written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected period, area, or contribution. In a given year, the study may examine any significant aspect of Western, nonWestern, or other musics."
MPER 201 "Orchestra I" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. Students enrolled in this course participate in a large orchestral ensemble. For evaluation, a supervising fulltime Music professor observes a minimum of two rehearsals and/or performances, and consults with the ensemble director."
MPER 223 "Contemporary Music Ensemble I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Department of Music or written permission of the Department of Music. A performance course based on weekly rehearsals leading to a final concert, open to all instrumentalists and singers, and focusing upon contemporary chamber music or other current musical practices."
MPER 233 "University Choir I" "Students enrolled in this course participate in the University Choir."
MPER 234 "Chamber Choir I" "Students enrolled in this course participate in the Chamber Choir."
MPER 251 "Private Study I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Music or the Specialization in Music Performance or the Specialization in Music Composition; written permission of the Department of Music. This course offers individual vocal or instrumental instruction in an approved area of music coordinated with the students program."
MPER 252 "Private Study II" "Prerequisite: MPER 251; enrolment in the Major in Music or the Specialization in Music Performance or the Specialization in Music Composition; written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of MPER 251."
MPER 298 "Special Topics in Music Performance" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in music performance."
MPER 301 "Orchestra II" "Prerequisite: MPER 201; written permission of the Department of Music upon successful audition. A continuation of MPER 201. Students enrolled in this course participate in a large orchestral ensemble. For evaluation, a supervising fulltime Music professor observes a minimum of two rehearsals and/or performances, and consults with the ensemble director."
MPER 321 "Chamber Ensemble I" "A study, through performance, of selected works from a broad range of repertoires. The works studied are determined by class needs and the particular skills of each student. Participation in public performances is required."
MPER 322 "Chamber Ensemble II" "Prerequisite: MPER 321. A continuation of MPER321."
MPER 323 "Contemporary Music Ensemble II" "Prerequisite: MPER 223. A continuation of MPER 223."
MPER 333 "University Choir II" "Prerequisite: MPER 233. A continuation of MPER 233."
MPER 334 "Chamber Choir II" "Prerequisite: MPER 234. A continuation of MPER 234."
MPER 351 "Private Study III" "Prerequisite: MPER 252; secondyear standing*; enrolment in the Major in Music or the Specialization in Music Performance or the Specialization in Music Composition; written permission of theDepartment of Music. A continuation of MPER252."
MPER 352 "Private Study IV" "Prerequisite: MPER 351; enrolment in the Major in Music or the Specialization in Music Performance or the Specialization in Music Composition; written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of MPER 351."
MPER 361 "Transdisciplinary Creation and Performance" "Prerequisite: Secondyear standing* or written permission of the Department of Music. A workshop on radical ways of expanding contemporary music and the connection with other disciplines (dance, theatre, film, architecture, biology, engineering, and more), through handson experimentation, creation, and performance with interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity as one of the core values."
MPER 390 "Advanced Private Study I" "Prerequisite: MPER 251, 252; enrolment in the Specialization in Music Performance; written permission of the Department of Music. This course offers intensive vocal or instrumental instruction for students specializing in performance. A juried examination is required."
MPER 398 "Special Topics in Music Performance" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in music performance."
MPER 399 "Special Topics in Music Performance" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in music performance."
MPER 401 "Orchestra III" "Prerequisite: MPER 301; written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of MPER 301. Students enrolled in this course participate in a large orchestral ensemble. For evaluation, a supervising fulltime Music professor observes a minimum of two rehearsals and/or performances, and consults with the ensemble director."
MPER 421 "Chamber Ensemble III" "Prerequisite: MPER 322. A continuation of MPER322."
MPER 423 "Contemporary Music Ensemble III" "Prerequisite: MPER 323. A continuation of MPER 323."
MPER 433 "University Choir III" "Prerequisite: MPER 333. A continuation of MPER 333."
MPER 434 "Chamber Choir III" "Prerequisite: MPER 334. A continuation of MPER 334."
MPER 451 "Private Study V" "Prerequisite: MPER 352; 60 credits completed; enrolment in the Specialization in Music Composition; written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of MPER 352."
MPER 452 "Private Study VI" "Prerequisite: MPER 451; enrolment in the Specialization in Music Composition; written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of MPER 451."
MPER 471* "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A studentdesigned course of study that focuses on an approved area(s) of performance practice, performance theory/analysis, pedagogy, and/or related disciplines, and involves consultation withanadvisor. When appropriate, the study may include a demonstration/performance."
MPER 472* "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A student repeating MPER 471 registers for MPER 472 for credit."
MPER 481 "Supervised Internship I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Music; 60 credits completed; written permission of the Department of Music. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for work completed for a recognized performancebased musical organization, or a project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a fulltime faculty member."
MPER 482 "Supervised Internship II" "Prerequisite: MPER 481; written permission of the Department of Music. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for work completed for a recognized performancebased musical organization, or a project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a fulltime faculty member."
MPER 490 "Advanced Private Study II" "Prerequisite: MPER 351, 352 or MPER 390; enrolment in the Specialization in Music Performance; thirdyear standing*; written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of MPER 390. An approved public recital may be substituted for thejuried examination."
MPER 498 "Special Topics in Music Performance" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A seminar/workshop in performance. Selected problems in the development of performance skills. The areas covered are, whenever possible, determined by the specific interests of the students. Topics in any given year may include technique, practice, style, interpretation, accompaniment, ensemble, teaching children, the adult student."
MPER 499 "Special Topics in Music Performance" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A seminar/workshop in performance. Selected problems in the development of performance skills. The areas covered are, whenever possible, determined by the specific interests of the students. Topics, in any given year, may include technique, practice, style, interpretation, accompaniment, ensemble, teaching children, the adult student."
MUSI 201 "Introduction to Music Fundamentals" "An intensive introductory course in basic music theory materials, with integrated practice in aural training and keyboard skills."
MUSI 211 "Aural Perception I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major or Minor in Music or the Specialization in Music Performance or the Specialization in Music Composition; or written permission of the Department of Music. A course designed to develop the musical ear through early intermediatelevel sightsinging, dictation, aural analysis, and keyboard skills."
MUSI 212 "Aural Perception II" "Prerequisite: MUSI 211 or written permission of the Department of Music. A continuation of the development of the musical ear through more complex intermediatelevel sightsinging, dictation, aural analysis, and keyboard skills."
MUSI 223 "Understanding Music" "A course in analytical listening for the student who has little or no musical background. The works studied represent the major styles and idioms of Western music."
MUSI 241 "Functional Keyboard Skills" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major or Minor in Music or the Specialization in Music Performance or the Specialization in Music Composition; or written permission of the Department. Open to all students whose principal instrument is not piano. Registration priority is given to students enrolled in the BFA Major in Music or specialization programs in the Department of Music. A workshop/laboratory that aims to develop and solidify fundamental and functional piano skills."
MUSI 242 "Functional Guitar Skills" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major or Minor in Music, or written permission of the Department. Open to all students whose principal instrument is not guitar. A workshop/laboratory that aims to develop and solidify fundamental and functional guitar skills."
MUSI 243 "Functional Vocal Skills" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major or Minor in Music, or written permission of the Department. Open to all students whose principal instrument is not voice. A workshop/laboratory that aims to develop and solidify fundamental and functional vocal skills."
MUSI 251 "Harmony I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major or Minor in Music, or written permission of the Department of Music. An introduction to the basic and intermediate principles of harmonic progressions and voiceleading within the tonal system, with reference to a variety of styles and genres, studied through analysis and composition."
MUSI 252 "Melody and Counterpoint" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major or Minor in Music, or written permission of the Department of Music. An introduction to the basic elements of melodic construction and contrapuntal technique, with reference to a variety of genres, studied through analysis and composition."
MUSI 261 "Music Composition I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major or Minor in Music, or the Specialization in Composition, or written permission of the Department. A seminar and workshop in composition, introducing students to compositional techniques from the classical and contemporary eras. Emphasis is placed on the development of the individuals composition skills through the realization of short compositional exercises for solo instruments or small ensembles."
MUSI 262 "Music Composition II" "Prerequisite: MUSI 261. A seminar and workshop in composition, completing the introduction to compositional techniques from the classical and contemporary eras. Emphasis is placed on the development of the individuals composition skills through the writing of short musical pieces for solo instruments or small ensembles."
MUSI 263 "Songwriting I" "Prerequisite: MUSI 211, 251 previously or concurrently. A course that allows students to explore and develop their skills through regular songwriting as well as critical analysis of existing songs."
MUSI 298 "Special Topics in Music" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Department of Music program or written permission of the Department of Music. A study of a selected area not available in other courses in music."
MUSI 311 "Aural Perception III" "Prerequisite: MUSI 212. A continuation of aural perception development through sightsinging, dictation, transcription, and aural analysis. The study of aural perception is done through a combination of classroom lectures and workshops."
MUSI 321 "Managing a Career in Music" "This course introduces developing artists to the business and promotional tools necessary for launching and navigating a career in music."
MUSI 322 "New Music and Media Arts" "An introduction to the practice and theory of contemporary soundbased art, new music expressions, and the media arts. This course explores the diversity of creative approaches, from the early 20th century to the present and the students creative application of these approaches."
MUSI 351 "Analysis" "Prerequisite: MUSI 251, 252. An introduction to analytical techniques relating to form, motivic development, and texture, with reference to a variety of styles and genres. This course also aims to develop critical thinking through the introduction to contemporary analytical approaches that may include disciplines such as semiology or hermeneutics."
MUSI 352 "Harmony II" "Prerequisite: MUSI 251. A continuation of the study of harmonic progressions and voiceleading within the expanded tonal system, with reference to a variety of styles and genres, studied through analysis and composition."
MUSI 353 "Creative Counterpoint" "Prerequisite: MUSI 211, 212, 251, 252. This course explores fugal and contrapuntal techniques found in contemporary music, pop and indie music, film, theatre and game music, and in music of diverse cultures. This course may include elements of performance and/or improvisation."
MUSI 361 "Music Composition III" "Prerequisite: MUSI 262. A seminar and workshop in composition, furthering the development of the individuals composition skills and beginning to cultivate a personal musical language and style through the writing of larger musical pieces."
MUSI 362 "Music Composition IV" "Prerequisite: MUSI 361. A seminar and workshop in composition, furthering the development of the individuals composition skills and beginning to cultivate a personal musical language and style through the writing of larger musical pieces."
MUSI 363 "Songwriting II" "Prerequisite: MUSI 263. A continuation of MUSI 263. This course allows students to further explore the development of a personal approach to songwriting and to prepare and present a portfolio of their work."
MUSI 364 "Acoustic Instrumentation and Orchestration" "Prerequisite: MUSI 211, 212, 251, 252. This course covers the fundamental elements of writing for acoustic instruments and for the combination of acoustic instruments in various ensembles and in a variety of genres including classical, contemporary art music, pop, and indie."
MUSI 365 "Electronic Instrumentation and Orchestration" "Prerequisite: MUSI 211, 212, 251, 252. This course covers the fundamental elements of writing for electronic and amplified instruments and for the combination of these instruments in various ensembles and in a variety of pitchbased genres including contemporary art music, pop and indie."
MUSI 398 "Special Topics in Music" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Department of Music program or written permission of the Department of Music. A seminar/workshop in an area of music that provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of music outside the scope of existing courses."
MUSI 399 "Special Topics in Music" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A seminar/workshop in an area of music which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of music outside the scope of existing courses."
MUSI 402 "Capstone Seminar and Project" "Prerequisite: 60 credits completed in the BFA Major in Music or BFA Specialization in Music Composition program or written permission of the Department of Music. A seminar exploring various strategies, aesthetics, methodologies, and resources for creating and for realizing the final creative and/or researchoriented project (the Capstone Project), followed by a workshop and final realization/presentation of the project. Students are encouraged to work in a collaborative, crossdisciplinary, and/or multicultural fashion."
MUSI 412 "Aural Perception IV" "Prerequisite: MUSI 311 or equivalent. A course in highly advanced, complex aural perception development through sightsinging, dictation, transcription, study of contemporary scores, aural analysis, and creativity. Emphasis is on eurowestern classical music of the 20th and 21st centuries, with inclusion of music from diverse genres and cultures."
MUSI 421 "Research in Music" "Prerequisite: 30 credits completed. A survey seminar based upon readings and practical applications of research in music, including psychology and neuroscience of music, historical/musicological approaches and researchcreation in music."
MUSI 461 "Music Composition V" "Prerequisite: MUSI 362 and enrolment in the Specialization in Music Composition. A seminar and workshop in composition, furthering the development of the individuals composition skills and personal musical language and style through the writing of large musical pieces and/or conception of largescale musical projects. Workshops may include individual tutoring."
MUSI 462 "Music Composition VI" "Prerequisite: MUSI 461 and enrolment in the Specialization in Music Composition. A final seminar and workshop in composition, furthering the development of the individuals composition skills and personal musical language and style through the writing of large musical pieces and/or conception of largescale musical projects. Workshops may include individual tutoring."
MUSI 471* "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A studentdesigned course of study that focuses on an approved area(s) of music theory, analysis, aural perception, orchestration, and/or related disciplines, and involves consultation with an advisor."
MUSI 472* "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. A student repeating MUSI471 registers for MUSI 472 for credit."
MUSI 481 "Supervised Internship I" "Prerequisite: 60 credits completed; written permission of the Department of Music. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for work completed for a recognized performancebased musical organization, or a performance project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a fulltime faculty member."
MUSI 482 "Supervised Internship II" "Prerequisite: MUSI 481; written permission of the Department of Music. This course provides students with the opportunity to obtain credit for work completed for a recognized musical organization, or a project under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a fulltime faculty member."
MUSI 491 "Special Project in Music" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. This course affords an opportunity for extensive development of aproject under the direction of a faculty member. Students submit a project proposal in accordance with the regulations for admission to the specialization."
MUSI 492 "Special Project in Music" "Prerequisite: MUSI 491. A continuation of MUSI491."
MUSI 498 "Special Topics in Music" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. An advanced seminar/workshop in an area of music which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of music outside the scope of existing courses."
MUSI 499 "Special Topics in Music" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department of Music. An advanced seminar/workshop in an area of music which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of music outside the scope of existing courses."
ECON 201 "Introduction to Microeconomics" "Introduction to the functioning of the market system; concepts of supply and demand, the role of prices in resource allocation; production decisions by firms. Analysis of differences between competition and monopoly, and the implications for economic efficiency; theories of labour markets and wage determination."
ECON 203 "Introduction to Macroeconomics" "An introductory analysis of aggregate economic activity. The focus is on the principles of determination of the level of employment, national income, real output, inflation, and international balance of payments. The course also analyzes the principles which govern trade relations among countries. These topics are integrated by a discussion of government monetary and fiscal policies to stabilize economic activity."
ECON 221 "Statistical Methods I" "Prerequisite: Cegep Mathematics 311 or MATH 201 or 206. This course is an introduction to the statistical procedures commonly employed by economists. Topics may include probability and probability distributions, discrete and continuous random variables, descriptive statistics, sampling distributions, statistical estimation, confidence intervals and hypothesis testing."
ECON 222 "Statistical Methods II" "Prerequisite: ECON 221; MATH 203 or 209; or equivalent. This course is a continuation of ECON 221 and is an introduction to the classical linear regression model, with an emphasis on the models assumptions and the properties and interpretation of the estimates derived from it. Consideration is also given to violations of the models assumptions, the effects on the estimates and steps to remedy these violations. Topics may include model specification, heteroscedasticity, multicollinearity and indicator variables. Students are also introduced to the acquisition and preparation of appropriate datasets."
ECON 251 "Economic History Prior to the Industrial Revolution" "This course is an introduction to the economic development of the Western world prior to the Industrial Revolution. The emphasis is on economic factors in history: evolution of economic systems, economic growth, development and regression within the context of changing institutional constraints. Interconnections among economic, social, and intellectual change are highlighted."
ECON 252 "Economic History After the Industrial Revolution" "This course is an introduction to the main economic trends in the era of sustained growth and development which accelerated with the Industrial Revolution and continues to the present. The emphasis is on Europe with some coverage of North America and the colonial/ developing world."
ECON 298 "Selected Topics in Economics" ""
ECON 299 "Selected Topics in Economics" ""
ECON 301 "Intermediate Microeconomic Theory I" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203; MATH 203 or 209 or equivalent. Theory and measurement of demand, theory of consumer behaviour, production, theory of the firm, and cost and revenue analysis."
ECON 302 "Intermediate Microeconomic Theory II" "Prerequisite: ECON 301. Market structures (perfect competition, monopoly, oligopoly), industrial concentration, factor markets, income distribution, economic efficiency, general equilibrium, welfare economics."
ECON 303 "Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory I" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203; MATH 203 or 209 or equivalent. The course introduces basic aggregative models to explore different theories on the determination of national income, interest rates and exchange rates. Topics covered include the definitions and measurements of indicators of economic activity; the components of aggregate supply and aggregate demand; the supply and demand for money; and the dynamics of national debt and deficit. The role of macroeconomic policy, such as fiscal and monetary policy, is also examined."
ECON 304 "Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory II" "Prerequisite: ECON 303. This course builds on the concepts developed in ECON 303 by introducing additional features to the basic models, such as the formation of expectations and attributes of the labour market, and then using these models to explore different theories concerning the determination and the evolution of major aggregate variables, economic growth and business cycles. The role of macroeconomic policy, with an emphasis on Canada, is also examined."
ECON 311 "Economic Development" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. The course investigates comparative economic development, with special attention to problems of capital formation, population growth, quality of labour force, and social and cultural attitudes towards economic modernization. Theories of economic development are evaluated in the context of the realities of historical patterns and the varying degrees of ability to achieve modernization."
ECON 318 "Canadian Economic Policy and Institutions" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. This course focuses on economic policies and institutions related to contemporary issues in the domestic economy. It is guided by the application of economic principles to such issues as regional disparities, income distribution and inequality, intra-provincial trade, social security policies, welfare programs, foreign ownership and control, competition policy, government regulation of business, unemployment, inflation, and environmental policy."
ECON 319 "International Economic Policy and Institutions" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. This course focuses on economic policies and institutions related to issues such as protectionism, regionalism, and globalization. Selected topics in exchange rate and currency convertibility, liberalization of economic systems, and international economic development are also covered."
ECON 324 "Economic Data Analysis" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203, 222 or equivalent. This course introduces students to the techniques of data retrieval, manipulation and analysis with particular emphasis placed on using a variety of national and international databases, database management, and spreadsheet and statistical software packages."
ECON 325 "Mathematics for Economists I" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203; MATH 203 or 209 or equivalent. This course introduces students to core topics in algebra and optimization techniques. The topics covered include vector spaces and linear transformations; matrix operations; characteristic values and vectors; matrix differentiation. In addition, the course covers a review of constrained and unconstrained optimization with economic applications; Taylor series representation, implicit function theorem, and related topics."
ECON 326 "Mathematics for Economists II" "Prerequisite: ECON 325. This course covers more advanced topics in optimization methods and introduces students to techniques in economics dynamics, as well as applications of integration. Topics include quadratic forms and second-order conditions, Kuhn-Tucker theory, the maximum principle, difference and differential equations, discounting and the rudiments of probability theory."
ECON 331 "Money and Banking" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. Overview of a monetary economy: nature, forms, and the economic role of money. Monetary standards: markets, prices, and the value of money; the payments system; financial markets. Determinants of size and distribution of wealth portfolios. Supply of money: measure, composition, and size determination. The economic role of commercial banks and non-bank financial intermediaries. Central banking and monetary policy. The international monetary system. (Topics covered within the Canadian banking institutional framework.)"
ECON 337 "Public Sector Economics" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. This course examines government fiscal activity within the context of a market economy. Rationale for public intervention is reviewed in terms of market failure and the consequent inefficiency in resource allocation. An overview of the spending and taxation policies in the Quebec-Canada context is presented. This is followed by an examination of topics such as public-spending growth, public goods, externalities and collective decision making."
ECON 350 "Economic History of Canada" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. This course introduces the student to Canadian economic development focusing on the period after Confederation. The course treats the subject in a thematic, rather than a chronological, fashion and places emphasis on conflicting schools of thought and their reflection in government policies."
ECON 361 "Industrial Organization" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. This course develops the relationship of the firm to various forms of market structure. The course focuses on the objectives of the corporation, corporate interdependence, and the government control of industry. A study of policy matters centres on anti-trust and corporate regulation, with respect to both the legislative and economic aspects."
ECON 362 "Economics of the Firm" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 222. This course stresses the application of economic principles and methodologies to the decision-making process of the firm, with an emphasis on the role of risk and uncertainty. Topics include decision-making criteria, demand analysis and estimation, cost analysis and estimation, pricing theory under various market structures, applied topics in pricing, and the impact of government on the firm. This course is primarily of interest to Commerce students, but is open to others as well."
ECON 377 "The Asia-Pacific Rim Economies" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. This course focuses primarily on those Asia-Pacific Rim countries that have achieved relatively high growth, and have undergone significant economic transformations over the past two decades. Among other things, it investigates Chinas transformation towards a market economy, Japanese industrial development strategies, and economic development in Taiwan and South Korea. As well, institutions and associations that reinforce these trends will be studied."
ECON 379 "The Irish Economy and the European Union" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. This course has a dual objective: to examine economic developments and recent growth in the Irish economy, and to examine the structure and importance of Irelands participation in the European Union in a global and European context. Particular issues addressed are: high growth in developed economies, migration, taxation policy, integration and trade, currency areas and capital mobility."
ECON 381 "Introduction to Labour Economics" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. The general objective of this course is to acquaint the student with various theoretical and empirical issues in the area of labour economics. Particular emphasis is placed upon the relation between theoretical frameworks and their empirical counterparts in Canada. Topics include the theory of wage determination, the effects of minimum wages, human capital theory, the economics of discrimination, and the economics of the household."
ECON 382 "Industrial Relations I" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. A study of the general and practical problems that arise in the labour field, such as collective bargaining, the legal framework for the settlement of industrial disputes, the weapons of industrial conflict; the labour movement; contemporary labour issues, such as automation, cost-push inflation, and structural employment."
ECON 386 "Economics of Human Resources" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. A study of recent contributions by economists to the understanding of and solution to social problems which society currently faces in the areas of crime, health, education, and welfare. In addition, specific federal and provincial governmental policies in these areas are analyzed with the standard tools of economics."
ECON 391 "Economics of the Environment" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. The subject of this course is environmental quality. It proceeds through an analysis of the relationships among the natural environment, economics, and institutions. The objective is to depict the problem of environmental quality as an economic problem whose solution demands major changes in economic, political, and legal institutions. Attention is also given to policies of collective environmental actions in which the effective management of common property resources is discussed. The course concludes with a discussion of some broader issues, such as the consistency of improved environmental quality with continued economic and population growth."
ECON 392 "Urban Economics" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203. This course focuses on the basic issues of economic growth and stagnation, urban land use, the problems of the urban public economy, and special urban problems, such as transportation, congestion, poverty, housing, urban renewal, and zoning."
ECON 393 "Economics of Uncertainty" "Prerequisite: ECON 201, 203, 222. This course focuses on the basic rules governing the application of statistical concepts such as means, variances, covariances, to the economic aspects of the problem of uncertainty. Applications in micro-economic analysis include economic aspects of insurance as well as issues in finance such as portfolio selection, efficient markets, and the capital-asset pricing models. Applications in macroeconomics include the analysis of business cycles and problems associated with the characterization of expectations as in models of inflation."
ECON 398 "Selected Topics in Economics" ""
ECON 399 "Selected Topics in Economics" ""
ECON 401 "Advanced Microeconomic Theory" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 326. Selected topics in microeconomic analysis including methodology, general equilibrium analysis, welfare economics; theory of the firm, factor pricing, and income distribution capital theory. Primarily for major, specialization, and honours students."
ECON 403 "Advanced Macroeconomic Theory" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 304, 326. Selected topics in macroeconomic analysis including construction of models of the economy encompassing the labour, product, and financial markets; the role of monetary and fiscal policies; classical, Keynesian, and post-Keynesian models. Primarily for major, specialization, and honours students."
ECON 409 "History of Early Economic Thought" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This course covers the evolution of economic thought from the Greek philosophers up to (and including) Classical economics. It seeks to provide the student with an outline of the development of economic analysis in this period."
ECON 410 "History of Modern Economic Thought" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This course covers the evolution of economic thought from the Historical School to modern controversies in economic reasoning, which includes a comparative treatment of Keynesian economics and Monetarism."
ECON 413 "Economic Growth and Fluctuations" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. A review of some theories of causes of economic fluctuations. Discussion of the economic climate and of stabilization policies."
ECON 414 "Economic Development: Policy Analysis" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This course offers an advanced treatment of selected topics related to issues in economic development. Particular emphasis is placed on models of growth and structural change, such as the two-gap model, input-output analysis, and computable general equilibrium models. Trade and industrial policies, fiscal and financial policies, as well as public-sector policies including taxation, spending, and cost-benefit analysis are also discussed."
ECON 421 "Econometrics I" "Prerequisite: ECON 324, 325 or equivalent. This course builds on the classical linear regression model as well as introducing time series models involving both stationary and non-stationary variables. Topics may include random regressors, method of moments estimation and a variety of models involving simultaneous equations, VEC, VAR, ARCH, panel, qualitative and limited dependent variables. Students continue to build on their knowledge of data management and a statistical software package through the application of these concepts and theories."
ECON 422 "Econometrics II" "Prerequisite: ECON 421. This course is intended for those interested in further developing their knowledge of econometrics and/or those contemplating pursuing graduate studies in economics. It re-examines the properties, assumptions and interpretation of the classical linear regression model and the maximum likelihood model through the use of matrix algebra. Students continue to build on their knowledge of data management and a statistical software package through the application of these concepts and theories."
ECON 423 "Topics in Applied Econometrics" "Prerequisite: ECON 324, 325 or equivalent. This course focuses on the development of skills in the analysis of both time-series and cross-sectional data. Time-series topics may include univariate stationary time series models, forecasting, unit-root theory, trend-stationarity, and testing and applications. Cross-sectional topics may include logit, probit and linear probability models. Students may also analyze large-survey microdata."
ECON 425 "Mathematics for Advanced Study in Economics" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304, 326. This course gives students the requisite mathematical background for graduate studies in economics. Topics include algebraic methods, and static and dynamic optimization techniques needed for the study of economic theory and econometrics. Difference and differential equations are also examined."
ECON 432 "Monetary Theory" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. The nature of the monetarist-Keynesian controversy and critical appraisal of the IS-LM-AS model. Special topics: theory and evidence of term structure of interest rates, post-Keynesian demand for and supply of money in aggregative and disaggregative economic models. Theory of macroeconomic policy. Transmission mechanisms, policy coordination, lags, international constraints, and other problems."
ECON 433 "Financial Economics" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304, 325 or equivalent. This course introduces students to the theory and practice of finance as seen from the economists point of view. In particular, it examines the following topics: the theory of decision making under uncertainty; the basic portfolio models, such as the CAPAM and the APT; equilibrium aspects of financial markets, such as the role of arbitrage in the pricing of financial assets; the pricing of derivative securities, such as options."
ECON 436 "The Economics of Taxation" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This course focuses on the effects of taxation on economic behaviour. Major topics considered include the excess burden of taxation in decisions to supply effort, savings and investment, the incidence of corporate taxation, and the design of commodity taxation. Among policy issues, topics such as tax evasion, and the taxation of multinational enterprises are examined."
ECON 437 "Economics of Public Expenditure" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This course examines the economic consequences of public expenditure on the economy. Topics covered include public goods, externalities, the theory of welfare measurement, public investment criteria, pricing policy of public enterprises, public choice and intergovernmental fiscal relations."
ECON 442 "International Economics: Trade Theory" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. The basis of international trade, gains from trade, factor-price equalization, the tariff, Canadian commercial policy, trade and development, economic integration."
ECON 443 "International Economics: Finance" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This course is an introduction to theory of national income determination in open economies with capital mobility. It includes analyses of balance of payments, exchange rate, and the role of monetary and fiscal policies under different exchange rate regimes. Among other issues covered are international policy coordination, optimum currency areas, and features of the international monetary system."
ECON 450 "Economic History" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. Advanced topics in economic history, with emphasis on the application of economic theory to specific historical questions."
ECON 461 "Industrial Organization" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302. This course examines departures from the perfect competition paradigm to analyze economic behaviour in an industrial setting. An industry consists of a number of firms which interact strategically to maximize their profits. Topics addressed include measures of market structure, theories of oligopoly, effects of potential entry, product differentiation and advertising, technological change, vertical integration, and monopoly and merger issues."
ECON 462 "The Corporate Economy" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302. This course investigates the nature and behaviour of the firm. Economic rationalizations are presented for organizing production within a firm. The economic effects of various organization structures are examined. Topics addressed include team production, contractual models of the firm, principal-agent theory, tournaments, and the relationship between managers, shareholders, and the outside market."
ECON 463 "Economics of Regulation" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302. This course is devoted to an examination of the economic aspects of governmental regulations. Besides a critical review of the economic theories of regulation, the spectrum of the existing regulatory network, and empirical investigations aimed at discerning cost-benefits, the course focuses on the process of regulatory reforms in all aspects of the Canadian economy."
ECON 464 "Game Theory, Information, and Economic Modelling" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This introductory course on game theory is a collection of mathematical tools to model and analyze strategic interactions in a variety of settings, from economic and social situations to politics and international relations. The course focuses on both non-co-operative and co-operative game theoretic modelling, in particular, strategic and extensive form games, Bayesian games, and coalitional games. Students learn to solve games using the concepts of dominant strategies, Nash-equilibrium, subgame perfection, Bayesian equilibrium, and the core. Applications may include repeated games, auctions, bargaining, oligopoly games, entry deterrence, pricing strategies, and collusion."
ECON 465 "The Economics of Professional Sport" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This is a course in applied microeconomic theory. Various observations on the state of professional sports are explained using economic theory. Evidence of the statistical relevance of such explanations is also investigated. Issues addressed include the magnitude of the earnings of professional sports stars; the impact of free agency on competitive balance in sports leagues; the value of professional sports teams to cities, and whether such valuation justifies public subsidization of franchises or arenas."
ECON 481 "Labour Economics" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. The course deals with topics in labour economics using microeconomic concepts such as inter-temporal decision-making, uncertainty, moral hazard, adverse selection and market signalling. The following topics are covered: labour supply and demand, wage differentials, human capital theory, efficiency wages and implicit contracts."
ECON 482 "Economics of Personnel and Industrial Relations" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. The main objective of this course is to describe how modern microeconomics and modern labour economics can be used to solve practical human resource and personnel issues. These include hiring and firing practices, optimal payment and compensation structure, unions and strike behaviour."
ECON 483 "Employment, Earnings and Labour Market Policies" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This course covers topics in labour economics from the macroeconomic perspective. The key topics include equilibrium unemployment, job search, wage determination mechanisms, labour income processes and labour mobility. The course also devotes a substantial amount of time to macroeconomic policy issues of the labour markets such as employment insurance, minimum wage and union."
ECON 485 "" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This course introduces students to the role of economics in health, health care, and health policy. It surveys the major topics in health economics and forms an introduction to the ongoing debate over health care policy. Topics include the economic determinants of health, the market for medical care, the market for health insurance, the role of government in health care, and health care reform."
ECON 491 "Environmental Economics" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302. This course provides a survey, from the perspective of economics, of public issues regarding the use of environmental resources, ecosystems and the management of environmental quality. The course covers both conceptual and methodological topics with recent and current applications. It begins with an introduction to the theory and methods of environmental and natural resource economics and concepts of sustainable development. Then the emphasis is shifted to the optimal use of natural resources, both non-renewable resources (mineral and energy) and renewable resources, and the valuation of environmental resources. In the last part of the course, we examine national and international environmental policy issues, including intergenerational equity and environmental ethics."
ECON 493 "Regional Economics" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This course introduces the student to the methods and techniques of regional economic analysis, and their application to the problems of regional economies within Canada. Among the micro-economic topics covered are the location behaviour of firms and households, and the factors determining the allocation of land among alternative competing uses. Macroeconomic topics include the measurement and analysis of regional income and growth levels, cyclical changes in those levels, and interregional differences in growth rates. Policy problems pertinent to Canadian regions are stressed throughout the course."
ECON 495 "Economics of Transportation and Communications" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302. Congestion problems and solutions, pricing, costs, demand, and regulation in transportation. Some applications to communications."
ECON 496 "Natural Resource Economics" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This course focuses on the problems of the finiteness of the natural resources base in Canada and in the world, and on an analysis of the demand for and supply of natural resources and energy. The course also discusses the economic aspects of a selected group of conservation measures (financial incentives, reallocation of property rights, regulation)."
ECON 497 "Income Distribution and Economic Inequality" "Prerequisite: ECON 222, 302, 304. This course examines the extent and dimensions of economic inequality among households both domestically and internationally. Topics covered include theories of income inequality, wealth inequality, recent trends in polarization, poverty, intergenerational bequests, the welfare state, and the role of government economic policy."
ECON 498 "Advanced Topics in Economics" ""
ECON 499 "Advanced Topics in Economics" ""
EDUC 200 "English Exam for Teacher Certification " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization, Teaching English as a Second Language Specialization, orArt Education Major or Specialization. The regulation respecting teaching licences requires that all students admitted to a teacher education program demonstrate their proficiency in the language of instruction as a condition for certification. To fulfill this requirement, students are required to register and write the exam approved by the MEES. Students must pass this exam prior to the start of the following internships: EDUC493, TESL 486 or 487, and ARTE 423."
EDUC 210 "Psychology of Education" "This course introduces students to a broad range of content in educational psychology, including its scope and methods, learning motivation, growth and development, adjustment, individual differences, guidance, and concept of self."
EDUC 211 "Child DevelopmentI" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization, or Major in Child Studies. This course provides an introduction to current theory (e.g.cognitive, socialcognitive, social learning) about childrens development and covers various domains of development (social, emotional, cognitive, physical) from conception to age 12. The implications of childrens development in relation to various contexts (e.g.family, neighbourhood, peers, education) are discussed."
EDUC 222 "Exploring Movement with Children" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization. From a multidisciplinary perspective, this course examines the following topics: the relationship between movement and selfknowledge, psychomotor development, and the role of physical activity in primary education. The course addresses the teachers role in incorporating movement into the curriculum for all children, including those with special needs through the use of specific techniques and activities."
EDUC 230 "Introduction to Philosophy of Education" "This course introduces the student to the content and form of several major educational theories, and to conceptual and logical procedures of philosophizing about education, with particular reference to teaching and learning."
EDUC 240 "Introduction to Training and Development " "This course provides an overview of the design and development of training in organizations by introducing students to theoretical and practical concepts. Topics explored include the organizational and personal benefits of training, different modes of delivery including elearning (an instructional systems design approach to training development), the transfer of learned skills to the workplace environment, the evaluation of training, the management of thedevelopment process, and trends and successful practices in the field."
EDUC 250 "Introductory Information Literacy Skills in Education" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Major in Child Studies. This course is designed to introduce students to basic research practices used in the field of education and its related disciplines. It familiarizes students with a variety of information sources in both print and nonprint formats. Emphasis is placed on developing a systematic search strategy and the use and evaluation of the information sources. Topics such as outlining and bibliographic formats are covered as part of the research process."
EDUC 260 "Historical and Current Curriculum Models for Early Childhood and" " Elementary Education "
EDUC 264 "Communication: Child, Parent and Teacher" "Prerequisite: 30 credits; enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization. This course focuses on the role parents play in the various stages of the childs academic, social, and emotional development. The format for this course is unique in that parents of the children in the observation nursery are involved, and students interact with them by conducting and participating in parentteacher seminars. Topics include parenting, the impact of the family on the childs classroom behaviour, child abuse, cultural issues, disciplinary measures at home and in school, the coordination of homeandschool academic goals, and achievement motivation."
EDUC 270 "Educational Communication " "In this course, students study fundamental communication skills used by effective instructors. By examining how to write the most basic types of instructional content, including definitions, objectives, descriptions and procedures, and the most common forms of written instructional content, including howto articles and lesson plans, this practical, writingintensive course emphasizes effective instructional communication methodologies."
EDUC 295 "Internship I: Prekindergarten Teaching" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization; EDUC 296 concurrently and in their first year of the ECEE program. This internship gives students firsthand knowledge ofthe importance of early education. It permits students to develop preliminary skills in observing, assessing, and meeting the needs of individual children, articulating educational objectives, working effectively with small groups, and planning and implementing a playbased curriculum. Students are placed in a prekindergarten class one day a week for a total of 60 hours."
EDUC 296 "Prekindergarten Teaching Seminar" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization; EDUC 295 concurrently. This course supports EDUC295 by offering a thorough introduction to theoretical and applied aspects of early childhood education through a weekly seminar consisting of lectures, discussions, and video presentations on such topics as the educational and developmental needs of young children, models of education, the role of the teacher, playbased curriculum and instruction, health and safety issues, and thedesign of appropriate prekindergarten learning environments."
EDUC 297 "Internship II: Observation and Evaluation in Education" "Prerequisite: EDUC 295, 296; enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization. The purpose of this course is to teach students how to conduct evaluations at the elementaryschool level. Students learn observation techniques, documentation procedures, authentic assessment, and formative and summative evaluation. Students learn how to create a dynamic profile of the child and how to prepare reports for parents, administrators, and specialists. Students conduct observations in recognized educational institutions (40 hours)."
EDUC 298 "Selected Topics in Education" ""
EDUC 299 "Selected Topics in Education" ""
EDUC 301 "Integrating Computers into the Elementary Classroom" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization, Art Education Major or Specialization. This course provides an introduction to theoretical and practical knowledge regarding the use of computers in elementary school classrooms. Assignments are designed to provide students with handson experience with the computer. Topics include social interaction and equity, problemsolving skills, software evaluation, interactive technologies, and curriculum planning."
EDUC 302 "Working in Childhood Settings: Leadership and Organizational Issues" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Major in Child Studies. This course provides students with an introduction to leadership in childhood settings, with a focus on child care. Issues reviewed include the organizational framework, quality of curriculum, human resources, leadership styles, financial and administrative matters, environments, and community relationships."
EDUC 303 "Children, Families, and Social Policy" "Prerequisite: EDUC 210 and 211; enrolment in Major in Child Studies. This course examines social policy as it relates to children and families in Canada. Policies may include such areas as childrens rights, child care, education, health, and social welfare."
EDUC 304 "Play in Childhood Settings" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization, or Major in Child Studies; EDUC 210 and 211. This course introduces students to (1) developmental theories of childrens play, and (2) practical ways that play can be facilitated in early childhood settings. Emphasis is placed on understanding: types of play (e.g. pretend, physical, solitary, social, rough and tumble); playbased curriculum and the role of the educator; toys, materials, and environments that promote highquality play; cultural diversity and play; and play in inclusive environments."
EDUC 305 "Technology for Educational Change" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an Education program. This course provides an introduction to advances in the theory, research, and practice of educational technology. Projects and activities allow for a diversity of interests."
EDUC 307 "Integrating Digital Technologies and Social Media in" " Learning Environments"
EDUC 311 "Child DevelopmentII: Ecology of the Family" "Prerequisite: EDUC 210, 211; enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization, or Major in Child Studies. This course is designed to provide students with an indepth review of the developmental, psychological,and sociocultural aspects of the child and the family. Emphasis is placed on structural elements related to the modern family (e.g.family size, developmental tasks), family relations (e.g.transition to parenthood, parenting styles, early relationships) and issues related to contemporary families."
EDUC 315 "Sexual Health Education for Children and Youths" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Early Childhood and Elementary Education; or 30 university credits and enrolment in the Major in Child Studies or the Minor in Interdisciplinary Studies in Sexuality. By evaluating available resources, practical tools, and curricula in todays Canadian society, this course familiarizes students with approaches to sexual health education that are suitable for working with children and youth in a variety of educational settings, including the home, community agencies, and schools. The importance of gearing education to accommodate different developmental stages, ages, and local social contexts is stressed."
EDUC 321 "Gender Socialization in Education" "This course focuses upon the role of gender in different levels of education. Factors such as culture, policy, and language are discussed. The mechanisms by which gender roles are maintained and challenged in educational institutions are also examined through the relevant theories."
EDUC 355 "Teaching Ethics and Religious Culture " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization. This course enables students to develop astimulating and sensitive ethics and religious culture program that promotes childrens ability to (a) reflect on ethical questions, (b)demonstrate an understanding of the phenomenon of religion, and (c) engage in dialogue with others. Relevant resource materials are examined and assignments focus upon development of activities for the elementarylevel classroom."
EDUC 360 "Introduction to Inclusive Practices " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Major in Child Studies; EDUC 210 and 211.This course is an introduction to inclusive practices for children with special needs in childhood settings. Topics include the evolution of special education; laws and policies; current models of service delivery; identification and assessment of learning needs; advocacy; and collaboration with families."
EDUC 361 "Inclusive Practices in Early Childhood Settings " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Major in Child Studies; EDUC 360. This course focuses on the implementation of inclusive practices in early childhood settings. Topics include differentiating and adapting curriculum; meeting the needs of individual children; collaborating with families and professionals; implementing developmentally appropriate practices; and facilitating development in various domains (socialemotional, cognitive, behavioural and communication)."
EDUC 362 "Inclusive Practices for SchoolAged Populations" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Major in Child Studies and EDUC 360. This course focuses on the implementation of inclusive practices in schoolaged populations, (K  11 settings). Topics include differentiating and adapting curriculum; meeting the needs of individual students; collaborating with families, teachers, and other professionals; implementing evidencebased strategies to promote literacy and academic achievement; and facilitating socialemotional, cognitive, and behavioural competencies."
EDUC 380 "Teaching Language Arts I" "Prerequisite: 30 credits; enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization. This course enables students to acquire the necessary skills for developing a stimulating and appropriate language arts program for kindergarten and primary grades. Current theories of literacy development and implications for planning and instruction are addressed. The course focuses on listening, speaking, reading, and writing, emphasizing the integration of language arts activities into other subject areas."
EDUC 381 "Teaching Language Arts II" "Prerequisite: 30 credits including EDUC 380; enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization. This course is a continuation of EDUC 380 with special emphasis onteaching language arts in Grades 3 to 6. Students become familiar with Quebec Education Program (QEP) guidelines, and various ways to organize and evaluate their implementation."
EDUC 382 "Teaching Science Concepts in the Elementary Classroom" "Prerequisite: 30 credits; enrolment in EarlyChildhood and Elementary Education Specialization. This course examines areas of science which are relevant to elementary education and emphasizes the development of the spirit of scientific inquiry. Resource materials, teaching methodology, and classroom activities are examined and evaluated in light of the MEES guidelines. Assignments emphasize developing activities for classroom use."
EDUC 384 "Teaching Social Studies in Elementary Schools" "Prerequisite: 30 credits; enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization. This course examines the teaching of social studies to elementaryschoolage children."
EDUC 385 "Teaching a Second Language in Early Childhood and" " Elementary School"
EDUC 386 "Teaching Mathematics I" "Prerequisite: 15 credits; enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization. This course introduces a conceptual analysis of school mathematics and its application to the early childhood and elementary education classrooms. Topics include numeracy acquisition, counting, whole number operations, and problem solving. Emphasis is placed on the development of childrens thinking and pedagogical practices aimed at assisting students to think mathematically. Current mathematics curricula are examined and evaluated in this context."
EDUC 387 "Teaching Mathematics II" "Prerequisite: 30 credits; enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization; EDUC 386. This course continues a conceptual analysis of school mathematics and its application to the elementary classroom. Topics include fractions, decimals, proportions, per cents, algebraic reasoning, and geometry. Emphasis is placed on the development of childrens thinking and pedagogical practices aimed at assisting students to think mathematically. Current mathematics curricula are examined and evaluated in this context."
EDUC 388 "Teaching Mathematics III" "Prerequisite: 30 credits; enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization; EDUC 387. This course continues a conceptual analysis of school mathematics and itsapplication to the elementary classroom. Topics include algebra, geometry, probability, statistics, and data analysis. Emphasis is placed on the development of childrens thinking and pedagogical practices aimed at assisting students to think mathematically. Current mathematics curricula are examined and evaluated in this context."
EDUC 395 "Internship III: Kindergarten Teaching" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization; 30 credits including EDUC 295, 296, 297; EDUC 396 concurrently. This internship is an eightweek (200 hours) supervised studentteaching experience in a fullday kindergarten classroom. Students share in the daily work of their cooperating teachers, and progress gradually from being participant observers working with small groups to taking charge of the whole class. Students practise their skills in activity planning, intervention strategies, the evaluation of student learning, and the management of classroom routines."
EDUC 396 "Kindergarten Teaching Seminar" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization; 30 credits including EDUC 295, 296, 297; EDUC 395 concurrently. This seminar complements EDUC395 by providing the opportunity, means, and impetus for students to reflect critically on their teaching philosophy and practice. Topics include the development of appropriate and stimulating learning environments, Ministre de lducation et de lEnseignement suprieur (MEES) kindergarten program guidelines, planning and implementation of learning centres, teaching centres, teaching the whole child, teacherparent relationships, and other current issues inkindergarten education."
EDUC 398 "Selected Topics in Education" ""
EDUC 399 "Selected Topics in Education" ""
EDUC 400 "Teaching Across the Curriculum" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization. Using language arts and the social sciences as the starting point, this course outlines different models for integrating school subjects in curriculum programming. Special attention is given to social science methodology, thematic planning and project work, and to the use of literature and drama. Students examine the links between the different programs of study developed for Quebec schools and their overall implications for curriculum planning."
EDUC 402 "Diversity Issues in Childhood" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Major Child Studies; EDUC 210 and 211. This course explores the diversity of contemporary Canadian childhood, including issues related to immigration, language, culture, and socioeconomic status. The course reviews theoretical approaches to diversity and examines how these shape practice with children and families in education and other fields."
EDUC 405 "Children and Technology" "Prerequisite: 30 credits. This course examines the interaction between children and technology from a sociocultural perspective, including the effects of media such as television, computers, and the Internet. Emphasis is placed on the developing child in the context of communication and technology as related to informal educational activities and play."
EDUC 406 "Physical Activity: Health and Wellbeing in" " Early Childhood Settings"
EDUC 411 "Toys, Media Literacy and Childrens Popular Culture" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an Education program. This interdisciplinary course examines the multiple roles that toys and the popular culture of childhood and adolescence can play in relation to development, learning, socialization and identity processes. Topics addressed include cultural and personal meanings constructed around toys, media literacy, the increasing role of new technologies, and issues related to the branding and marketing of toys through the media."
EDUC 422 "Sociology of Education I" "Prerequisite: 30 credits. This course emphasizes sociological concepts and their theoretical and practical applications to the study of education. The focus is on the following: how the education system is structured, how schooling and education fit into the overall social structure, how educational experiences vary for members of different social groups, the role education plays in gender, class, and racial inequalities, the complexity of issues relating to student evaluation and performance, and the role education plays in social change."
EDUC 423 "Sociology of Education II" "Prerequisite: EDUC 422. This course considers how a particular sociological viewpoint contributes to our understanding of school life. Topics include family, socialization patterns, teacher and pupil perspectives, and how these are interrelated."
EDUC 426 "Comparative Education I" "Prerequisite: Six credits in Education. This course undertakes the study of the impact of political and cultural differences upon educational systems (for example, the impact of language differences, nationalism, colonialism, neocolonialism, political socialization). The approach is comparative, with particular emphasis on contrasting educational systems and practice inselected countries."
EDUC 427 "Comparative Education II" "Prerequisite: Six credits in Education. This course examines the sources and impacts of educational change from a comparative perspective. Topics include pedagogical alternatives; sociopolitical alternatives; educational implications of technological change and economic policy; policies of elitism and egalitarianism. Methods include comparative case study and analysis of specific theories of educational innovation."
EDUC 432 "Seminar in Epistemology and Education" "Prerequisite: Six credits in Education, or permission of the Department. Theories of knowledge are considered in this course, with special attention being given to the bearing of such topics as perception, evidence, truth, knowledge, and belief as relating to educational thought and practice. Students are expected to become familiar with recent periodical and other literature in the field."
EDUC 434 "Aesthetics and Education" "Prerequisite: EDUC 230 or permission of the Department. The nature of aesthetic value and experience, and theories of art and beauty are examined. The development of the emotions and imagination, and their functions in aesthetic awareness are central concerns of this course. Students are expected to become familiar with the relevant literature in the field."
EDUC 445 "Education in Quebec" "Prerequisite: 30 credits in a teacher certification program, or holder of a provisional teaching authorization, or permission of the Department. This course covers the history, the contemporary movements, and the structures of Quebec education. The historical section covers the periodfrom 1608 until the present. Topics included are the legislation, regulations, rules, and directives pertaining to the respective roles of the Ministre de lducation et de lEnseignement suprieur (MEES)"
EDUC 450 "The Inclusive Classroom: Educating Exceptional Children" "Prerequisite: 30 credits including EDUC 210 or 211; enrolment in a teacher training program (ECEE, TESL, Art Education). This course focuses on the education of children with special needs. Emphasis is placed on ways in which classroom teachers can provide appropriate help or instruction to meet the needs of exceptional children. Topics include identification and assessment of learning needs; adaptation of curriculum and activity design,service delivery models; parentprofessional relationships; legislative policies."
EDUC 454 "Diversity in the Classroom" "Prerequisite: 30 credits including EDUC 210 or 211. Students examine the implications of diversity in the classroom for teaching, curriculum, and childrens educational experience. Various theoretical approaches are analyzed, including critical pedagogy, multicultural education, and intercultural education. The importance of inclusive curricula is discussed."
EDUC 460 "Child Studies Field Experience: Early Childhood Settings" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Major in Child Studies; EDUC 302; EDUC 304, 406; EDUC 461 concurrently. Students develop skills in observation and in planning curriculum for children in early childhood settings. Students are required to complete a field placement for two halfdays or one fullday per week, for a total of 60 hours, in a centrebased child care or preschool setting for children ages 0 to 5 years."
EDUC 461 "Child Studies Seminar: Early Childhood Settings" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Major in Child Studies; EDUC 302; EDUC 304, 406; EDUC 460 concurrently. This course complements EDUC 460 and covers theoretical and applied aspects of working with children in early childhood settings. This course focuses on reflective practices, curriculum planning and using observational techniques, and organization of childcare settings that promote the health, safety and education of children ages 0 to 5 years."
EDUC 462 "Child Studies Field Experience: Inclusive Practices in" " Childhood Settings "
EDUC 463 "Child Studies Seminar: Inclusive Practices in Childhood Settings" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Major in Child Studies; EDUC 360; EDUC 361 or 362; EDUC 462 concurrently. This course complements EDUC 462 and covers theoretical and applied aspects of working with children in inclusive childhood settings. This course focuses on reflective practices, curriculum planning and using observational techniques."
EDUC 464 "Research Methods in Child Studies" "Prerequisite: 60 credits in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization, or Major in Child Studies. This course introduces students to quantitative, qualitative, and mixedmethods research designs used by researchers in child studies and education. Students learn how research studies are conceptualized and conducted, and how data are analyzed and interpreted, and gain experience in the critical evaluation and application of research. Students complete a series of assignments during a lab section of the course. This course is primarily intended as a foundation for students who are preparing for graduate school."
EDUC 493 "Internship IV: Primary Teaching" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization; EDUC200 and 60 credits including EDUC295, 296, 297; EDUC 388, 395, 396 previously or concurrently; EDUC494 concurrently. The internship is an eightweek (200hours) supervised studentteaching experience ina primary classroom (Grades 1 to 3). Students share in the daily work of their cooperating teachers, and progress gradually from being participant observers working with small groups to taking charge ofthe whole class as independent, creative practitioners. Students perfect their skills in activity planning, intervention strategies, the evaluation of student learning, and the management of classroom routines."
EDUC 494 "Primary Teaching Seminar" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization; 60credits including EDUC 295, 296, 297; EDUC 388, 395, 396 previously or concurrently; EDUC 493 concurrently. The seminar complements EDUC493 by providing the opportunity, means, and impetus for students to reflect critically on their teaching philosophy and practice. Topics include the development of appropriate and stimulating learning environments, Ministre de lducation et de lEnseignement suprieur (MEES) primary program guidelines, planning and implementation of curriculum units, teacherparent relationships, and other current issues in primary education."
EDUC 495 "Internship V: Upper Elementary Teaching" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization; 90 credits including EDUC 222, 295, 296, 297, 301, 380, 381, 382, 386, 387, 395, 396; EDUC 388, 493, 494 previously or concurrently; EDUC496 concurrently. Students are placed in an elementary classroom (Grades4to6) for an eightweek studentteaching experience (200 hours). They are provided with the opportunity to continue to develop their own teaching strategies and enhance their skills in curriculum planning and implementation, preparing and evaluating classroom materials, and monitoring student progress. Students participate in the daily routines and educational duties of their cooperating teachers and become involved in student activities."
EDUC 496 "Upper Elementary Teaching Seminar" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education Specialization; 90 credits including EDUC 295, 296, 297, 395, 396; EDUC 388, 493, 494 previously or concurrently; EDUC 495 concurrently. The main focus of EDUC496 is the discussion, review, and analysis of relevant material in the context of students internship placements. Topics include curriculum development and diversity in the classroom population, involvement of parents in their childrens education, Ministre de lducation et de lEnseignement suprieur (MEES) guidelines, teaching strategies, selfreflection and evaluation."
EDUC 498 "Advanced Topics in Education" ""
EDUC 499 "Advanced Topics in Education" ""
INST 250 "Introductory Information Literacy Skills" "This course is designed to introduce students to basic research practices. It familiarizes students with a variety of information sources in both print and nonprint formats. Emphasis is placed on developing a systematic search strategy in the use and evaluation of the information sources. Topics such as outlining and bibliographic format are covered as part of the research process."
LIBS 495 "Field Practice" "Prerequisite: Completion of all other required Library Studies courses. In consultation with the appropriate supervising librarian, the student is placed in a local library system other than the library in which the student is employed. The duration of the field practice is five weeks. Field practice includes a wide variety of library tasks. In addition the student is required to complete a written research project on a topic approved by the professor."
TESL 201 "Introduction to Teaching English as a Second Language" "This introductory course provides students with a comprehensive idea of what Teaching English as a Second Language entails. Activities are chosen to expose students to the wide range of possibilities of teaching English in Quebec and around the world. Students are initiated into this muchindemand profession through projectbased activities that require them to apply course concepts and put teaching skills into practice. They also develop skills in exploiting spoken and written texts as resources for language learning."
TESL 221 "Phonology for Teachers" "Prerequisite: TESL 231 concurrently. The aim of this course is to provide students with a knowledge of the major features of the English sound system, and to prepare them, through practical teaching assignments with ESL students, to apply this knowledge inthe language classroom. Contrasts and comparisons are made with French and other languages."
TESL 231 "Modern English Grammar" "Prerequisite: TESL 221 concurrently. This course provides students with an introduction to the grammatical system of English: morphemes, words, phrases, clauses, and sentences. Students become familiar with basic concepts and terminology in English grammar along with written usage conventions. They receive a coherent framework for analyzing English grammar, correcting grammar and usage errors, and writing texts designed for specific audiences."
TESL 232 "English Grammar" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Early Childhood and Elementary Education or Art Education (Visual Arts). This course provides students with an introduction to the grammatical system of English: morphemes, words, phrases, clauses, and sentences. Students become familiar with basic concepts and terminology in English grammar along with written usage conventions. They receive a coherent framework for analyzing English grammar, correcting grammar and usage errors, and writing texts designed for specific audiences."
TESL 298 "Selected Topics in TESL" ""
TESL 299 "Selected Topics in TESL" ""
TESL 324 "Methodology I" "This course reviews current theory in applied linguistics which relates directly to teaching and learning ESL in the classroom. Techniques and methods appropriate to child, adolescent, and adult learners are discussed and demonstrated. In this course theemphasis is on classroomoriented techniques and materials related to the teaching of listening and speaking."
TESL 326 "TESL Pedagogy: General" "Prerequisite: TESL 221, 231, EDUC 200 previously or concurrently. The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the profession of teaching English as a second language to children, adolescents, and adults. Students examine a variety of approaches and methodologies that have been used in the past and how these have contributed to current thinking and practices. They have the opportunity to observe Englishlanguage instruction in a variety of settings through visits and video presentations. They discuss issues related to lesson planning, audiovisual aids, classroom organization and management techniques. Special attention is paid to the creation of lessons appropriate to adult learners. A minimum of 30 hours is spent observing and assisting in adult ESLclasses. Assignments include classroombased projects."
TESL 330 "Computers in Language Learning" "Prerequisite: TESL 221, 231, 326. The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the uses of the computer in the ESL class. Students acquire knowledge of computer applications for language learning and how to incorporate this knowledge into classroom practice."
TESL 331 "Grammar for Teachers" "Prerequisite: TESL 231 with a grade of C+ or better. The purpose of this course is to provide students with current approaches, methods, and materials in the teaching of grammar to children, adolescents, and adults of the ESL classroom. Students will be prepared to analyze critically and modify published classroom materials related to the teaching and learning of grammar."
TESL 341 "Language Acquisition" "Prerequisite: TESL 221, 231 previously or concurrently; or permission of the Department. This course examines sociocultural and psycholinguistic influences on the acquisition of a first and second language. These issues are examined in relation to the learning and teaching of a second language to children, adolescents, and adult learners."
TESL 351 "History of the English Language" "Prerequisite: TESL 221, 231 with a grade of C+ or better, or permission of the Department; TESL 415, 427, 467 concurrently. Thepurpose of this course is to provide students with an overview of the significant changes which have taken place in the English language from ProtoIndoEuropean to the present. Students consider the evolving nature of English and its role as aninternational language."
TESL 361 "Teaching English for Specific Purposes" "Prerequisite: TESL 324, or permission of the Department. This course provides instruction in the teaching of language skills to those who require English either as an auxiliary to their scientific, technical, or professional skills or as amedium for training in these areas."
TESL 398 "Selected Topics in TESL" ""
TESL 399 "Selected Topics in TESL" ""
TESL 415 "Testing, Evaluation and Course Design" "Prerequisite: For BEd students: TESL 426 or 427 previously or concurrently; for certificate students: TESL324 previously or concurrently. The purpose of this course is to prepare students to test and evaluate learners in different types of ESL programs. Students examine syllabi and evaluation systems used in the schools and in adult education settings, and become familiar with placement and proficiency testing materials."
TESL 424 "Methodology II" "Prerequisite: TESL 324. This course continues the presentation of techniques and methods begun in TESL 324. In this course the emphasis is on classroomoriented techniques and materials related to the teaching of reading and writing."
TESL 426 "Pedagogy: Primary" "Prerequisite: TESL 326; TESL 330, 466, EDUC210 previously or concurrently. The purpose of this course is to familiarize students with the principles of TESL pedagogy in regular and intensive ESL primary classrooms. This course emphasizes knowledge of MEES primaryschool programs and approved materials. Students learn classroom management techniques, assessment practices, and how to adapt materials to specific primaryschool contexts."
TESL 427 "Pedagogy: Secondary" "Prerequisite: TESL 426, 466; TESL 467 concurrently. The purpose of this course is to familiarize students with the principles of TESL pedagogy in regular and Language Arts (ESLLA) ESL secondary classrooms. This course emphasizes knowledge of MEES secondary programs and approved materials. Students learn classroom management techniques, assessment practices, and how to adapt materials to specific secondaryschool contexts."
TESL 433 "Practicum" "Prerequisite: ENGL 213; TESL 331, 341, 415, and 424 either previously or concurrently. This course is open only to students enrolled in the TESL Certificate. In this course, students practise techniques which were introduced in their methodology courses. There are opportunities for observation of ESL classes taught by experienced teachers. Techniques presented in TESL 324 and 424 are practised in microteaching, peer teaching, and sessions with groups of ESL students. Requirements include lesson planning and the evaluation of ones own teaching performance."
TESL 466 "Internship: PrimaryI" "Prerequisite: TESL 330, 426, EDUC210 previously or concurrently. The purpose of this course is to apply the principles acquired in TESL426 to the teaching of ESL to primaryschool learners. Students attend oncampus seminars and spend a minimum of 140 hours observing and teaching in a primary school supervised by a cooperating teacher and a university professor."
TESL 467 "Internship: SecondaryI" "Prerequisite: TESL 427 concurrently; TESL466. The purpose of this course is to apply the principles acquired in TESL 427 to the teaching of ESL to secondaryschool learners. Students attend oncampus seminars and spend a minimum of 140 hours observing and teaching in a secondary school supervised by a cooperating teacher and a university professor."
TESL 471 "Teaching Language Arts: Secondary " "Prerequisite: TESL 426, 466; TESL 427 previously or concurrently. The purpose of this course is to familiarize students with the principles and techniques of teaching comprehension and production skills to advanced secondary learners of ESL. Students are made familiar with current approaches to the teaching of highlevel oral interaction skills, reading and writing skills, corrective feedback to writing, and the use of longterm projects and portfolios. The use of authentic English texts such as essays, novels, short stories, poetry, and drama is emphasized."
TESL 486 "Internship: PrimaryII" "Prerequisite: 105 credits including ENGL 212, 213 with a grade of C+ or better; EDUC200, 450, 454; TESL 330, 331, 341, 415, 426, 466, 471; TESL487, 488 concurrently. The purpose of this course is to further develop the skills required in teaching ESL to primaryschool learners. Students teach a minimum of 210hours supervised by a cooperating teacher and a university professor. In addition, students attend oncampus seminars in which they discuss and reflect upon their experiences in the schools."
TESL 487 "Internship: SecondaryII" "Prerequisite: EDUC200; TESL 467; TESL 486, 488 concurrently. The purpose of this course is to further develop the skills required in teaching ESL to secondaryschool learners. Students teach a minimum of 210 hours supervised by a cooperating teacher and a university professor. In addition, students attend oncampus seminars in which they discuss and reflect upon their experiences in the schools."
TESL 488 "Internship Seminar" "Prerequisite: TESL 486, 487 concurrently. The purpose of this course is to integrate the knowledge gained during the BEd with the knowledge that students have acquired during practice in the field. Students reflect on and make explicit their own professional and personal development over the course of the fouryear program and set goals for future longterm professional development."
TESL 491 "Study in a Special Subject" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course provides an opportunity for advanced students to intensify their study beyond the area of specialization already represented by the curriculum. The selected subject varies with the special interest of the instructor conducting the course in any given year."
TESL 492 "Study in a Special Subject" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. A student repeating TESL 491 registers for credits under TESL 492."
TESL 498 "Advanced Topics in TESL" ""
TESL 499 "Advanced Topics in TESL" ""
ESL 202 "Developing Academic English Language Skills" "Prerequisite: Placement by the Concordia Comprehensive ESL Placement Test (ConCEPT). This course helps nonnativespeaking students develop the language skills necessary for academic work through an integrated program ofgrammar, vocabulary, reading, and writing. The coursework enables students to build a wide range of vocabulary and grammatical structures and apply them to essential university tasks such as paraphrasing, expository writing, and processing academic texts."
ESL 204 "Refining Academic English Language Skills " "Prerequisite: ESL 202 or placement by the Concordia Comprehensive ESL Placement Test (ConCEPT). This course helps nonnativespeaking students strengthen their English language skills and apply them to highlevel academic tasks such as critical reading, synthesizing, and integrated writing assignments. Attention is paid to analyzing patterns in written English and making appropriate language choices as well as identifying, integrating, and referencing appropriate academic source material."
ESL 205 "Academic Oral CommunicationI " "Prerequisite: Placement by the Concordia Comprehensive ESL Placement Test (ConCEPT). This course helps students develop the oral skills necessary for speaking and listening in an Englishspeaking academic environment. The focus of the course is the improvement of students overall pronunciation skills, including nativelike production of English speech at the level of individual sounds, words, and sentences, as well as the development of the listening skills necessary for effective oral communication. This course includes a multimedia language lab component."
ESL 206 "Academic Oral CommunicationII " "Prerequisite: ESL 205 or placement by the Concordia Comprehensive ESL Placement Test (ConCEPT). This course helps students achieve greater intelligibility and fluency by practising oral communication skills in meaningful discourse, as part of communicative activities and publicspeaking assignments. Emphasis is placed on the learning of speech phenomena at the discourse level such as production of nativelike stress, rhythm, intonation, and speaking rate. This course includes a multimedia language lab component."
ESL 298 "Selected Topics in ESL" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ADED 202 "The Scope and Nature of Adult Education Programs" "This course is designed to help students develop an understanding of the scope and nature of adult education programs. Emphasis is placed on existing programs, and institutions and agencies providing them. The course stresses active student participation and selfdirectedness."
ADED 220 "Adults as Learners" "This course examines the unique physiological, psychological, and sociological characteristics of adults, their influence on adult learning and development, and their implications for educational intervention. Attention is given to changes which occur at various stages of the adult life cycle, and particularly to the dimensions which affect the adults selfconcept and orientation to learning, the motivations, needs, and interests which cause adults to participate in educational activities."
ADED 230 "Roles and Competencies of Adult Educators" "The purpose of this course is to review the state of professionalization of adult education. General skills, knowledge, and attitudes expected of adult educators regardless of the setting in which they work are examined. In addition, according to the participants needs and interests, an opportunity is given to explore competencies related to the particular roles of, e.g., administrators, program developers, trainers, leaders, instructors, counsellors, and volunteer workers."
ADED 240 "Introduction to Research in Adult Education" "This course is designed to introduce students to how to gain access to and utilize major information sources in adult education. In addition, the course examines research interests and problem areas studied in adult education and related fields, along with current trends and various methods of inquiry used."
ADED 298 "Selected Topics in Adult Education" ""
ADED 299 "Selected Topics in Adult Education" "Specific topics for these courses, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are statedin the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ADED 302 "Group Dynamics" "This course examines the processes, conditions, and skills involved when adults work in groups. Participants develop a knowledge and understanding of group dynamics and acquire the skills needed for using groups as a means of adult learning. One of the approaches this course takes is to have participants learn about group dynamics by being actively involved in various interactive group situations."
ADED 333 "Methods and Techniques for Facilitating Adult Learning" "This course is designed to give adult educators an opportunity to practise and improve their skills in facilitating adult learning. Different models of educational processes and optimal conditions for promoting adult learning are examined; attention is given tocase studies, role plays, and simulation methods and techniques, as well as to individualized learning formats."
ADED 344 "Design of Adult Learning Projects" "The purpose of this course is to assist participants in developing a clear working concept of various models for planning and designing adult learning projects. To facilitate this understanding, the different steps of the process are closely examined and discussed. Participants are given an opportunity to design and conduct a learning activity in the area of subject matter speciality. Asystems approach, including methods for evaluating the design of the learning project is emphasized."
ADED 345 "Evaluating Adult Learning Projects" "The purpose of this course is to assist participants in developing a clear working concept of various models for assessing the effectiveness of adult learning projects. The course emphasizes a systematic approach to evaluation, techniques for collecting information and providing feedback to program operation and impact. Participants are given the opportunity to conduct an evaluation of an adult learning project in the area of subject matter speciality."
ADED 370 "Workshops for Adult Educators" "These workshops examine a number of topics and problems related to the field of adult education. The issues considered may differ from year to year and are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule. The workshop format is designed to provide adult educators with learning opportunities that are flexibly scheduled or in the form of a oneweek intensive seminar."
ADED 398 "Selected Topics in Adult Education" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ADED 403 "Diversity in Adults" "It is the role of adult educators (agents of change) to confront issues of diversity and to challenge the forces of racism, sexism, classism, homophobia, and discrimination. By integrating notions of education, and by reflecting on the roles of practitioners, this course develops strategies to resist structural inequality and oppression."
ADED 410 "Adult Education in Canada and Quebec" "The purpose of this course is to examine the historical development and current state of adult education in Canada, with special reference to Quebec. Various factors which influenced the development of adult education in our society are explored; the focus is on present status, role and structure, and sociocultural and philosophical underpinnings of the field."
ADED 412 "Concepts and Values in Adult Education" "This seminar is designed to encourage adult educators to reflect upon and question what one is engaged in and why. A selection of conceptual and philosophical issues underlying adulteducational practice is critically examined and discussed. Attention is given to the meaning of words, the nature of ideas and values, the implications of assumptions and principles which are deemed specific in the sphere of the education of adults."
ADED 440 "Issues in the Practice of Adult Education" "The purpose of this seminar is to study and discuss current issues relating to the field and profession of adult education in general, along with more specific and local concerns. Group and individual interests have an important bearing on the design of this course."
ADED 496 "Integrative InternshipI" "Prerequisite: ADED 201; ADED 202 and 15 credits in the program. This internship is designed to assist individual students in achieving a synthesis of their own experiential learning in light of acquired knowledge, skills, values, and attitudes through the clarification of personal aims and the philosophy of adult education. Students will normally enrol in this internship near the end of their program."
ADED 497 "Integrative InternshipII" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of ADED496. This internship is designed to extend the personal aims and philosophy of adult education arrived at in Integrative InternshipI, and engage in a special project in an adult education facility where supervision is provided by the host institution."
ADED 498 "Advanced Topics in Adult Education" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ENCS 282 "Technical Writing and Communication" "Prerequisite: Students must have satisfied the requirements in <a href="/academics/undergraduate/calendar/current/sec71/71-10.html#b71.20.7">71.20.7"
ENCS 393 "Social and Ethical Dimensions of Information and" "            Communication Technologies"
ENCS 483 "Creativity, Innovation and Critical Thinking in" "            Science and Technology"
ENCS 484 "Development and Global Engineering" "Prerequisite: Minimum of 60 credits in an engineering program or minimum of 45 credits in a non-engineering program. International development and global engineering: globalization; development projects; planning and analysis; and participatory data gathering. A project. Lectures: three hours per week."
ENCS 498 "Topics in Engineering and Computer Science" "Prerequisite: Permission of the GCS. This course may be offered in a given year upon the authorization of the GCS. The course content may vary from offering to offering."
ENGR 201 "Professional Practice and Responsibility" "Health and safety issues for engineering projects: Quebec and Canadian legislation; safe work practices; general laboratory safety common to all engineering disciplines, and specific laboratory safety pertaining to particular engineering disciplines. Review of the legal framework in Quebec, particularly the Professional Code and the Engineers Act, as well as professional ethics. Lectures: one and a half hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week, alternate weeks."
ENGR 202 "Sustainable Development and Environmental Stewardship" "Introduction to the concept of sustainable development and the approaches for achieving it. Relationships with economic, social, and technological development. Methods for evaluating sustainability of engineering projects, including utilization of relevant databases and software. Impact of engineering design and industrial development on the environment. Case studies. Lectures: one and a half hours per week."
ENGR 208 "Engineering Industrial Experience Reflective Learning II " "Prerequisite: ENGR 108 and permission of the GCS. This course expands on the students second industrial experience term in their related field of study to further develop their knowledge and work-related skills."
ENGR 213 "Applied Ordinary Differential Equations" "Prerequisite: MATH 204 (Cegep Mathematics 105) previously or concurrently; MATH 205 (Cegep Mathematics 203). This course introduces Engineering students to the theory and application of ordinary differential equations. Definition and terminology, initial-value problems, separable differential equations, linear equations, exact equations, solutions by substitution, linear models, orthogonal trajectories, complex numbers, form of complex numbers: powers and roots, theory: linear equations, homogeneous linear equations with constant coefficients, undetermined coefficients, variation of parameters, Cauchy-Euler equation, reduction of order, linear models: initial value, review of power series, power series solutions, theory, homogeneous linear systems, solution by diagonalisation, non-homogeneous linear systems. Eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
ENGR 233 "Applied Advanced Calculus" "Prerequisite: MATH 204 (Cegep Mathematics 105); MATH 205 (Cegep Mathematics 203). This course introduces Engineering students to the theory and application of advanced calculus. Functions of several variables, partial derivatives, total and exact differentials, approximations with differentials. Tangent plane and normal line to a surface, directional derivatives, gradient. Double and triple integrals. Polar, cylindrical, and spherical coordinates. Change of variables in double and triple integrals. Vector differential calculus; divergence, curl, curvature, line integrals, Greens theorem, surface integrals, divergence theorem, applications of divergence theorem, Stokes theorem. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
ENGR 242 "Statics" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213 previously or concurrently; PHYS 204; MATH 204. Resultant of force systems; equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies; distributed forces; statically determinate systems; trusses; friction; moments of inertia; virtual work. Shear and bending moment diagrams. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
ENGR 243 "Dynamics" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213, 242. Kinematics of a particle and rigid body; forces and accelerations; work and energy; impulse and momentum; dynamics of a system of particles and rigid bodies, introduction to vibrations. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
ENGR 244 "Mechanics of Materials" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213; ENGR 242 or 245; ENGR 233 previously or concurrently. Mechanical behaviour of materials; stress; strain; shear and bending moment diagrams; introduction to inelastic action. Analysis and design of structural and machine elements subjected to axial, torsional, and flexural loadings. Combined stresses and stress transformation. Deflections. Introduction to elastic stability. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week. Laboratory: three hours per week, alternate weeks."
ENGR 245 "Mechanical Analysis" "Prerequisite: PHYS 204; ENGR 213 previously or concurrently. Forces in a plane and in space, moments of forces, Varignons theorem, rigid bodies in equilibrium, free-body diagram. Centroids, centres of gravity. Distributed forces, moments of inertia. Principle of virtual work. Kinematics of particles and rigid bodies. Forces and accelerations; work and energy; impulse and momentum. Kinetics of particles and rigid bodies. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
ENGR 251 "Thermodynamics I" "Prerequisite: MATH 203 (Cegep Mathematics 103). Basic principles of thermodynamics and their application to various systems composed of pure substances and their homogeneous non-reactive mixtures. Simple power production and utilization cycles. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
ENGR 290 "Introductory Engineering Team Design Project" "Prerequisite: ENCS 282; ENGR 213, 233. The introductory team design project introduces students to teamwork, project management, engineering design for a complex problem, technical writing and technical presentation in a team environment. Students work in teams and each team designs and builds a prototype defined by the Department. Students present their design and demonstrate that their design works in a competition at the end of the term. The students are also introduced to the basic principles of mechanics including the description of translational motion, rotational motion, forces and moments, work and energy, and they build a mechanical prototype to which the electronics and software are then added. A significant team project is required in this course. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
ENGR 301 "Engineering Management Principles and Economics" "Introduction to project delivery systems. Principles of project management; role and activity of a manager; enterprise organizational charts; cost estimating; planning and control. Company finances; interest and time value of money; discounted cash flow; evaluation of projects in private and public sectors; depreciation methods; business tax regulations; decision tree; sensitivity analysis. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
ENGR 308 "Engineering Industrial Experience Reflective Learning III " "Prerequisite: ENGR 208 and permission of the GCS. This course further expands on the students third industrial experience in their related field of study to further develop their knowledge and work-related skills."
ENGR 311 "Transform Calculus and Partial Differential Equations" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213, 233. Elements of complex variables. The Laplace transform: Laplace transforms and their properties, solution of linear differential equations with constant coefficients. Further theorems and their applications. The Fourier transform: orthogonal functions, expansion of a function in orthogonal functions, the Fourier series, the Fourier integral, the Fourier transform, the convolution theorem. Partial differential equations: physical foundations of partial differential equations, introduction to boundary value problems. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
ENGR 361 "Fluid Mechanics I" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213, 233, 251. Basic concepts and principles of fluid mechanics. Classification of fluid flow. Hydrostatic forces on plane and curved surfaces, buoyancy and stability, fluids in rigid body motion. Mass, momentum, and energy conservation integral equations. Bernoulli equation. Basic concepts of pipe and duct flow. Introduction to Navier-Stokes equations. Similarity and model studies. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
ENGR 371 "Probability and Statistics in Engineering" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213, 233. Axioms of probability theory. Events. Conditional probability. Bayes theorem. Random variables. Mathematical expectation. Discrete and continuous probability density functions. Transformation of variables. Probabilistic models, statistics, and elements of hypothesis testing (sampling distributions and interval estimation). Introduction to statistical quality control. Applications to engineering problems. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
ENGR 391 "Numerical Methods in Engineering" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213, 233; COMP 248 or COEN 243 or MECH 215 or BCEE 231. Roots of algebraic and transcendental equations; function approximation; numerical differentiation; numerical integration; solution of simultaneous algebraic equations; numerical integration of ordinary differential equations. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
ENGR 392 "Impact of Technology on Society" "Prerequisite: ENCS 282; ENGR 201, 202. Social history of technology and of science including the industrial revolution and modern times. Engineering and scientific creativity, social and environmental problems created by uncontrolled technology, appropriate technology. Lectures: three hours per week."
ENGR 411 "Special Technical Report" "Prerequisite: ENCS 282; permission of the Department. Students must submit a report on a topic related to the students discipline and approved by the Department. The report must present a review of a current engineering problem, a proposal for a design project, or a current engineering practice."
ENGR 412 "Honours Research Project" "Prerequisite: ENCS 282; minimum 75 credits in the BEng program with a cumulative GPA of 3.00 or better; permission of the Department. Students work on a research project in their area of concentration, selected in consultation with and conducted under the supervision of a faculty member of the Department. The students work must culminate in a final report, as well as an oral presentation. Students planning to register for this course should consult with the Department prior to term of planned registration. Intended for students with potential interest in graduate programs."
ENGR 472 "Robot Manipulators" "Prerequisite: ELEC 372 or MECH 371. Spatial descriptions and transformations. Manipulator forward and inverse kinematics. Jacobians: velocities and static forces. Manipulator dynamics. Trajectory generation. Position control of manipulators. Force control of manipulators. Robot programming languages. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ENGR 498 "Topics in Engineering" "Prerequisite: Permission of the GCS. This course may be offered in a given year upon the authorization of the GCS. The course content may vary from offering to offering."
AERO 290 "Introduction to Aircraft Design" "Prerequisite: AERO 201. Students taking this course will work as part of a multidisciplinary team to solve an assigned aerospace conceptual design problem. The course provides introductory, design-related knowledge on aerospace design topics including structural layout, powerplant integration, integrated systems requirements (such as avionics, electrical, flight controls, hydraulic, fuel, air, pressurization) and preliminary performance predictions. Lectures instruct students on the conceptual design process; aircraft sizing including take-off weight, empty weight and fuel-fraction estimates; mission analysis and trade studies; airfoil selection; constraint diagrams for thrust-to-weight and wing loading estimation; fuselage layout, engines and control surface sizing; structural and systems layout; introductory stability, control and performance; and cost analysis methods. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
AERO 371 "Modelling and Control Systems" "Prerequisite: PHYS 205; ENGR 213, 243; ENGR 311 or ELEC 342 or ELEC 364 previously or concurrently. Definition and classification of dynamic systems and components. Modelling of system components using ordinary differential equations: mechanical, electrical, electromechanical, and electrohydraulic subsystems in an airplane. Modelling of systems using transfer function models, block diagrams and signal flow graphs. Linearization of non-linear systems. Transient and steady-state characteristics of dynamic systems. Systems analyses using time domain methods, root-locus methods, and frequency response methods. Characteristics and performance of linear feedback control systems. System stability. Proportional, integral and derivative controllers. Simulation technique using Matlab/Simulink. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
AERO 390 "Aerospace Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: AERO 201, 371; ENCS 282. General design philosophy and the design process. Design factors such as product safety, reliability, life cycle costs and manufacturability. Design in the aerospace context: vehicle and system design with regard to mission requirements, configuration, sizing, loads, etc. Mathematical modelling, analysis, and validation. Introduction to Computer-Aided Design and Engineering (CAD and CAE). Design documentation. A team-based project in which an aerospace system/subsystem is designed, implemented, documented and presented is an intrinsic part of this course. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
AERO 417 "Standards, Regulations and Certification " "Prerequisite: ENGR 201. Overview of DoT and other international aviation standards (e.g. FAA), regulations and certification procedures; regulatory areas, namely, pilot training/testing, air traffic procedures, aircraft systems design and airworthiness; development process for new regulations and criteria for certification. Lectures: three hours per week."
AERO 431 "Principles of Aeroelasticity" "Prerequisite: ENGR 243, 311. Aerodynamic loading of elastic airfoils. Phenomenon of divergence. Effect of flexible control surface on divergence of main structure. Divergence of one- and two-dimensional wing models. Phenomenon of flutter. Flutter of two- and three-dimensional wings. Flutter prevention and control. Panel flutter in high speed vehicles, flutter of turbomachine bladings, galloping vortex-induced oscillations, bridge buffeting. Lectures: three hours per week."
AERO 444 "Concurrent Engineering in Aerospace Systems" "Prerequisite: AERO 390. Introduction: objectives, definitions, impact on product development; process modelling and optimization; forming of engineering team; selection of techniques, methodology and tools; market design focus vs. quality design focus; development time management; process integration; aerospace case studies/projects, future trends. Lectures: three hours per week."
AERO 446 "Aerospace Vehicle Performance" "Prerequisite: MECH 361. Introduction to fixed-wing aircraft operation. Flying environment and its measurement by aircraft instrumentation. Computation of lift and drag, effects of viscosity and compressibility. Review of piston, turboprop, turbojet and turbofan power plants. Operational performance of aircraft in climb, cruise, descent and on ground. Advanced aircraft systems. Operational considerations in aircraft design. Projects on selected topics. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
AERO 455 "Computational Fluid Dynamics for Aerospace Applications" "Prerequisite: ENGR 311, 391; MECH 361. Introduction to computational methods in fluid dynamics using commercial CFD codes; aspects of geometry modelling, structured and unstructured grid generation, solution strategy, and post-processing; conversion of CAD to CFD models; an overview of basic numerical methods for the Navier-Stokes equations with emphasis on accuracy evaluation and efficiency. Elements of turbulence closure modelling. User-defined function for customized physical models into commercial CFD codes. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: three hours per week, alternate weeks."
AERO 462 "Turbomachinery and Propulsion" "Prerequisite: MECH 351, 361. Aircraft design process, preliminary sizing and thrust requirements. Rotary and fixed wing aerodynamics and stability. Helicopter configurations. Structure and fatigue design considerations. Review of the gas turbine cycle and components arrangement. Turbo-propulsion: turboprop, turbofan, turbojet and turboshafts. Energy transfer in turbomachines: Euler equation, velocity triangles. Dimensional analysis of turbomachines. Flow in turbomachines. Three-dimensional flow in turbomachines. Mechanisms of losses in turbomachines. Axial-flow turbines and compressors. Centrifugal compressors. Compressor and turbine performance maps; surge and stall. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
AERO 464 "Aerodynamics" "Prerequisite: MECH 361. Flow conservation equations, incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, inviscid irrotational and rotational flows: the Euler equations, the potential and stream function equations. Dynamics of an incompressible inviscid flow field: the Kelvin, Stokes, and Helmholtz theorems. Elementary flows and their superposition, panel method for non-lifting bodies. Airfoil and wing characteristics, aerodynamic forces and moments coefficients. Incompressible flows around thin airfoils, Biot-Savart law, vortex sheets. Incompressible flow around thick airfoils, the panel method for lifting bodies. Incompressible flow around wings, Prandtls lifting line theory, induced angle and down-wash, unswept wings, swept wings. Compressible subsonic flow: linearized theory, Prandlt-Glauert equation and other compressibility correction rules, the area rule. Transonic flow: Von Karmans ransonic small disturbance equation, transonic full potential equation, super-critical airfoils. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
AERO 465 "Gas Turbine Design" "Prerequisite: AERO 462. Review of turbo-propulsion types and energy transfer in turbomachines. Two- and three-dimensional flow. Lift and drag for airfoils. Cascade tests and correlations. Aerodynamic losses: physics, mechanisms, control of viscous effects. Preliminary and detailed design of turbines and compressors. Structural and thermal design requirements. Failure considerations: creep, fatigue and corrosion. Performance matching. Combustion and gearbox design. Air and oil systems design requirements. Installations and acoustics. Evolution of design. Recent trends in technologies. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
AERO 471 "Aircraft Hydro-Mechanical and Fuel Systems" "Prerequisite: AERO 201 or permission of the Department. This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: hydraulic system, primary and secondary flight control actuation systems, landing gear systems, and fuel system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation, are covered. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 12 hours total."
AERO 472 "Aircraft Pneumatic and Electrical Power Systems" "Prerequisite: AERO 201; ENGR 361. This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: electrical power system, auxiliary and emergency power systems, environmental control system, ice and rain protection system, and pneumatic power system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation, are covered. A project is required, including a laboratory component. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 12 hours total."
AERO 480 "Flight Control Systems" "Prerequisite: AERO 371 or ELEC 372 or MECH 371 or SOEN 385. Basic flight control and flight dynamics principles. Aircraft dynamic equations and performance data. Implementation of aircraft control: control surfaces and their operations, development of thrust and its control; autopilot systems, their algorithms, dynamics and interaction problems. Flight instruments, principles of operation and dynamics. Cockpit layouts  basic configuration, ergonomic design, control field forces; advanced concepts in instruments, avionics and displays; HUD; flight management systems, and communication equipment. Introduction to flight simulation: overview of visual, audio and motion simulator systems; advanced concepts in flight simulators. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
AERO 481 "Materials Engineering for Aerospace" "Prerequisite: MECH 221. Different types of materials used in aerospace. Metals, composites, ceramics, polymers. Failure prediction and prevention. Modes of material failure, fracture, fatigue, creep, corrosion, impact. Effect of high temperature and multiaxial loadings. High temperature materials. Cumulative damage in fatigue and creep. Materials selection. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
AERO 482 "Avionic Navigation Systems" "Prerequisite: ENGR 371 or COMP 233; AERO 371 or ELEC 372 or MECH 370 or SOEN 385. Basics of modern electronic navigation systems, history of air navigation, earth coordinate and mapping systems; basic theory and analysis of modern electronic navigation instrumentation, communication and radar systems, approach aids, airborne systems, transmitters and antenna coverage; noise and losses, target detection, digital processing, display systems and technology; demonstration of avionic systems using flight simulator. Lectures: three hours per week."
AERO 483 "Integration of Avionics Systems " "Prerequisite: AERO 482. Introduction to the basic principles of integration of avionics systems; review of Earths geometry and Newtons laws; inertial navigation sensors and systems (INS); errors and uncertainty in navigation; Global Positioning System (GPS); differential and carrier tracking GPS applications; terrestrial radio navigation systems; Kalman filtering; integration of navigation systems using Kalman filtering; integration of GPS and INS using Kalman filtering. Lectures: three hours per week."
AERO 485 "Introduction to Space Systems " "Prerequisite: MECH 351, 361. Classification of space propulsion systems; Tsiolkovskjs equation; ideal rocket and nozzle design; flight performance; basic orbital mechanics; chemical propellant rocket performance analysis; fundamentals of liquid and solid propellant rocket motors; electric, solar, fusion thruster. Lectures: three hours per week."
AERO 486 "Aircraft Stress Analysis " "Prerequisite: ENGR 243, 244. Definition of load paths in typical aircraft structures. Derivation of analysis procedures to enable the designer to size preliminary designs. Internal shear flow distributions that balance external loads. Stress analysis of open and closed cell beams; statically indeterminate beams and frames; single and multi cell torque boxes; symmetric heavy fuselage frames. Structural instability of columns, beams, plates and flanges in compression and shear. Centres of twist and flexure; structural warping; margins of safety; concepts of optimum design; lug analysis and mechanical joints; matrix analysis methods leading to the Finite Element method. Stress analysis of thin-walled metallic structures. Lectures: three hours per week."
AERO 487 "Design of Aircraft Structures " "Prerequisite: AERO 486. Design process for aircraft structures. Aero/performance aspects of aircraft structures. Airworthiness and design considerations. Materials. Static, vibratory and aeroelastic loadings. Propulsion-induced loadings. Functions and fabrication of structural components. Design for buckling of aircraft structures: local buckling, instability of stiffened panels, flexural torsional buckling. Design for fracture and fatigue failures. Stress analysis and design of wings, fuselages, stringers, fuselage frames, wing ribs, cut-outs in wings and fuselages, and laminated structures. Design using Finite Element Method. Concept of Optimum Design of Aircraft Structures. Design case studies. Lectures: three hours per week."
AERO 490 "Capstone Aerospace Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: 75 credits in the program; AERO 390; ENCS 282; ENGR 301. A supervised design, simulation or experimental capstone design project including a preliminary project proposal with complete project plan and a technical report at the end of the fall term; a final report by the group and presentation at the end of the winter term. Lectures: one hour per week, one term. Equivalent laboratory time: three hours per week, two terms."
BCEE 342 "Structural Analysis I" "Prerequisite: ENGR 244. Analysis of statically determinate structures: deflections, strain energy concepts, virtual work principles. Mueller Breslau principle, influence lines. Approximate methods for statically indeterminate structures. Collapse load analysis. Cables and Arches. Computer applications. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
BCEE 343 "Structural Analysis II" "Prerequisite: BCEE 342. Analysis of statically indeterminate structures: the methods of consistent deformations, slope deflection, and moment distribution. Application of virtual work principles. Introduction to matrix methods. Computer applications. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
BCEE 344 "Structural Design I" "Prerequisite: BCEE 342. Basis for limit states design. Code requirements. Structural steel design: tension and compression members, beams and beam-columns. Connections. Introduction to the design of timber members. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
BCEE 345 "Structural Design II" "Prerequisite: BCEE 342. Behaviour of reinforced concrete elements in flexure, compression, shear and bond. Limit states design of reinforced concrete beams, one-way slabs, columns, and footings. Serviceability limits states. Introduction to prestressed concrete and masonry structures. Design examples. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
BCEE 371 "Surveying" "Prerequisite: BLDG 212 or CIVI 212. Elementary operations employed in engineering surveying; use, care, and adjustment of instruments; linear and angular measurements; traversing; earthwork calculations; theory of errors; horizontal and vertical curves and curve layout; slope stakes and grades, application of surveying methods to city, topographic surveying, and introduction to advanced surveying techniques; use of digital computers in surveying calculations. Summer school taken before entering second year of study in the BEng program. Lectures and fieldwork: eight hours per day; six days per week for three weeks."
BCEE 451 "Construction Engineering" "Prerequisite: BLDG 341 or CIVI 341. The nature of construction and the environment in which the industry works; organizational structures for project delivery; construction contracts and documents; introduction to construction processes: excavation and site works, foundation layout, concrete form design, concrete, steel, timber, and masonry construction; project planning, scheduling, and control; construction safety. Lectures: three hours per week."
BCEE 452 "Fundamentals of Finite Element Analysis of Structures" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213, 233; BCEE 231, 343. Matrix formulation of the force and of the displacement methods of analysis. Direct stiffness approach; finite element methods for structural analysis. Truss, beam, plane strain, plane stress, shell and solid elements. Computer applications. Lectures: three hours per week."
BCEE 455 "Introduction to Structural Dynamics" "Prerequisite: ENGR 243, 391; BCEE 342. Theory of vibration. Dynamic response of simple structural systems. Effects of blast, wind, traffic, and machinery vibrations. Basic concepts in earthquake resistant design. Computer applications. Lectures: three hours per week."
BCEE 464 "Project Cost Estimating " "Prerequisite: ENGR 301. Techniques and procedures used for estimating cost of construction projects. Cost estimation process; elements of project cost; conceptual and detailed cost estimation methods; risk assessment and range estimating; case studies; computer-aided estimating."
BCEE 465 "Construction Planning and Control " "Prerequisite: BLDG 478. Methods of delivering construction. Contractual relationships and organizational structures. Phases of project development. Estimating resource requirements; costs and durations. Bidding strategies. Network analysis using CPM and PERT, time-cost trade-off, resource allocation. Cash flow analysis. Earned-value concept for integrated time and cost control. Quality control. Value engineering. Lectures: three hours per week."
BCEE 466 "Simulations and Design of Construction Operations " "Prerequisite: BCEE 451. Principles of modelling and simulation. Classification and validation of simulation models. Analysis of input data and outputs. Object Oriented Simulation (OOS). Simulation languages. Application of discrete event simulation in construction operations including earthmoving operations, building construction operations, and tunnelling operations."
BLDG 341 "Building Engineering Systems" "Prerequisite: BCEE 231 previously or concurrently. Introduction to systematic solution of building engineering problems. Techniques treated include linear programming, network analysis, nonlinear programming. Introduction to decision analysis and simulation. Application of optimization methods for solution of design problems in building science, building environment, building structures, and construction management, taking into account sustainability issues. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 365 "Building Science" "Prerequisite: ENGR 251. General introduction to the thermal environment and sustainable development issues. Topics include heat, temperature, one-dimensional steady-state processes. Convection: natural and forced. Radiation. Combined radiative and convective surface transfer. Psychrometrics. Thermal comfort. Air quality. Condensation: surface and interstitial. Introduction to compressible viscous flow, friction, and flow in pipes; boundary layer and wind effects. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
BLDG 366 "Acoustics and Lighting" "Prerequisite: ENGR 243. General introduction to the aural and visual environment. Psychological impact of environment. Subjective and objective scales of measurement. Introduction to vibration. The hearing mechanism. Transmission of sound, passive control of noise in buildings, transmission loss, absorption and reverberation time. Room acoustic assessment. Active control of the aural environment. Visual perception. Photometry, brightness, luminance, and illumination. Concept of natural lighting in building. Artificial lighting; light sources; luminaries. Calorimetry. Calculation methods for artificial lighting. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
BLDG 371 "Building Service Systems" "Prerequisite: BLDG 365 previously or concurrently. Principles of building service systems, including electrical, gas, communications, service-water supply and distribution; introduction to plans, codes, and standards for utility distribution systems. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
BLDG 390 "Building Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: BLDG 341; ENCS 282; BCEE 344 previously or concurrently. The project of each team will encompass the conceptual and preliminary design of a new medium-size building. Students learn building engineering design process, methodology, identification of objectives, building codes, formulation of design problems. Development and evaluation of sustainable building design alternatives. Conceptual building design: spatial requirements, design of space layout. Preliminary building design: synthesis and design of structures, enclosure systems, and services (HVAC, lighting, electrical distribution) using computer-aided design tools. Performance evaluation using modelling, sensitivity analysis and cost estimation. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
BLDG 462 "Modern Building Materials" "Prerequisite: CIVI 321. Engineering properties of building materials such as: plastics, synthetic fibres, adhesives, sealants, caulking compounds, foams, sandwich panels, composites, polymer concrete systems, fibre-reinforced concretes, plastic mortars, polymers for flooring, roofing, synthetic wall papers. Their structural, thermal, and acoustical properties. Consideration of corrosion, bio- and thermal-degradation, stability to ultraviolet and solar radiation. Laboratory sessions to illustrate synthesis, application, testing, deterioration, and protection. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 463 "Building Envelope Design" "Prerequisite: BLDG 365; CIVI 321. Technical influences in the design of building envelope, including the control of heat flow, air and moisture penetration, building movements, and deterioration. Application of air/vapour barrier and rain-screen systems. Performance assessment and building codes through case studies and design projects. Sustainable design principles. Design of walls, roofs, joints and assemblies. Cause of deterioration and preventive measures, on-site investigation. Relevant building codes and standards. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 465 "Fire and Smoke Control in Buildings" "Prerequisite: BLDG 365. Topics treated include fire and smoke control; failure mechanisms of building enclosure illustrated by case studies; code requirements for enclosure systems; systems approach for fire safety. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 471 "HVAC System Design" "Prerequisite: BLDG 371; BLDG 476 previously or concurrently. Principles of HVAC system design and analysis; sustainable design issues and impact on environment; component and system selection criteria including room air distribution, fans and air circulation, humidifying and dehumidifying processes, piping and ducting design. Air quality standards. Control systems and techniques; operational economics; computer applications. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
BLDG 472 "Building Energy Conservation Technologies" "Prerequisite: BLDG 471 previously or concurrently. Standards of energy efficiency in buildings.Trends in energy consumption. Energy audit: evaluation of energy performance of existing buildings, weather normalization methods, measurements, disaggregation of total energy consumption, use of computer models, impact of people behaviour. Energy efficiency measures in buildings: approaches, materials and equipments, operating strategies, evaluation methods of energy savings. Renewable energy sources: passive or active solar systems, geothermal systems, free-cooling. Optimum selection of energy sources. Impact of emerging technologies. Case studies. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 473 "Building Acoustics" "Prerequisite: BLDG 366. Noise control criteria and regulations, instrumentation, noise sources, room acoustics, walls, barriers and enclosures, acoustical materials and structures, vibration and noise control systems for buildings. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 474 "Building Illumination and Daylighting" "Prerequisite: BLDG 366. Production, measurement and control of light. Photometric quantities, visual perception and colour theory. Daylight and artificial illumination systems. Radiative transfer, fixture and lamp characteristics, control devices and energy conservation techniques. Design of lighting systems. Solar energy utilization and daylighting. Integration of lighting systems with mechanical systems for energy conservation and sustainable development. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 475 "Indoor Air Quality" "Prerequisite: BLDG 371 previously or concurrently. Elements of indoor air quality, physical/ chemical characteristics of contaminants, health effects, standard requirements. Estimation of the levels of indoor air contaminants in buildings. Design of ventilation systems for pollutant control. Air pollution due to outdoor air supply through ventilation systems. Effect of outdoor air pollution on indoor air quality. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 476 "Thermal Analysis of Buildings" "Prerequisite: BLDG 365; ENGR 361. Two- and three-dimensional steady-state and transient conductive heat transfer together with convection and radiation as applied to building materials and geometries. Heating and cooling load analysis, including building shapes, construction type, solar radiation, infiltration, occupancy effects, and daily load variations. Computer applications for thermal load analysis. Introduction to heat exchangers. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
BLDG 477 "Control Systems in Buildings" "Prerequisite: BLDG 371 previously or concurrently. Introduction to automatic control systems. Control issues related to energy conservation, indoor air quality and thermal comfort in buildings. Classification of HVAC control systems. Control system hardware: selection and sizing of sensors, actuators and controllers. Practical HVAC control systems; elementary local loop and complete control systems. Designing and tuning of controllers. Building automation systems. Case studies. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 478 "Project Management for Construction" "Prerequisite: BLDG 341 or CIVI 341. Introduction to project management techniques in construction, including project delivery methods, construction contracts, cost estimating and bidding planning and scheduling, cash flow analysis, project tracking and control, computer applications. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 482 "Impact of Technology on Society and Architecture" "Prerequisite: 20 courses in the BEng program. History of architecture as the confluence of social and technological evolution. Methodology and thought processes in the theory and design of cities and the human habitat. Impact of technology on society. Energy conservation, environmental constraints and sustainability issues. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 490 "Capstone Building Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: Minimum of 75 credits in the BEng (Bldg) program including ENCS 282; BCEE 344, 345; BLDG 371, 390; ENGR 301. The project of each team encompasses the integrated design of at least three sub-systems of a new or retro-fitted building to achieve high performance and efficiency at reasonable cost; sustainable design and environmental impact issues are addressed in all projects. In the process, students learn, through case studies and literature survey, the information gathering and decision/design process, problem-resolution as well as aspects related to management, teamwork and communication. Students registering for this course must contact the course coordinator for the detailed procedure. Lectures: two hours per week, two terms."
BLDG 490A "Capstone Building Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: Minimum of 75 credits in the BEng (Bldg) program including ENCS 282; BCEE 344, 345; BLDG 371, 390; ENGR 301. The project of each team encompasses the integrated design of at least three sub-systems of a new or retro-fitted building to achieve high performance and efficiency at reasonable cost; sustainable design and environmental impact issues are addressed in all projects. In the process, students learn, through case studies and literature survey, the information gathering and decision/design process, problem-resolution as well as aspects related to management, teamwork and communication. Students registering for this course must contact the course coordinator for the detailed procedure. Lectures: two hours per week, two terms."
BLDG 490B "Capstone Building Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: Minimum of 75 credits in the BEng (Bldg) program including ENCS 282; BCEE 344, 345; BLDG 371, 390; ENGR 301. The project of each team encompasses the integrated design of at least three sub-systems of a new or retro-fitted building to achieve high performance and efficiency at reasonable cost; sustainable design and environmental impact issues are addressed in all projects. In the process, students learn, through case studies and literature survey, the information gathering and decision/design process, problem-resolution as well as aspects related to management, teamwork and communication. Students registering for this course must contact the course coordinator for the detailed procedure. Lectures: two hours per week, two terms."
BLDG 491 "Labour and Industrial Relations in Construction" "Prerequisite: ENGR 301. The study of labour legislation with special emphasis on the construction industry, union organization, the theory and practice of negotiations, mediation, contract administration, and arbitration. Review of actual contracts, discussion of future trends. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 492 "Construction Processes" "Prerequisite: BCEE 451 or ENGR 451. A study of current construction methods and techniques. The subjects include site preparation and earth-work, wood framing, masonry, concrete forming, slip forming, precast construction, industrialized building, deep excavation shoring and underpinning. Design, erection, and removal of temporary construction work. Current field practice and safety considerations. Site visits. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 493 "Legal Issues in Construction" "Prerequisite: ENGR 301. Legal concepts and processes applicable to the development of constructed facilities and to the operation of the construction firm. Emphasis on Quebec law and institutions. Lectures: three hours per week."
BLDG 498 "Topics in Building Engineering" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course may be offered in a given year upon the authorization of the Department. The course content may vary from offering to offering and will be chosen to complement the available elective courses. Lectures: three hours per week."
CIVI 231 "Geology for Civil Engineers" "Basic principles of physical and structural geology with emphasis on topics related to civil engineering, study of minerals, rocks and soil types, load formation, techniques of air-photo interpretations, and geological mapping. Geological site investigation. Preparation and interpretation of engineering geology reports. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
CIVI 321 "Engineering Materials" "Prerequisite: CHEM 205 or equivalent. Linear and nonlinear material behaviour, time-dependent behaviour; structural and engineering properties of structural metals; behaviour of wood; production and properties of concrete; bituminous materials, ceramics, plastics; introduction to composite materials. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: three hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 341 "Civil Engineering Systems" "Prerequisite: BCEE 231 previously or concurrently. Development of concepts and techniques commonly associated with systems engineering which are applicable to design and operation of systems that concern civil engineers. Design and planning process; problem formulation, optimization concepts, linear programming, decision analysis; system simulation; network planning and project scheduling; computer applications. The techniques developed are used to solve problems in transportation, water resources, structures, and construction management. Lectures: three hours per week."
CIVI 361 "Introduction to Environmental Engineering" "Prerequisite: ENGR 361. Ecosystems considerations, food chain, natural decomposition, and recycling; environmental problems and impact of engineering activities. Various modes of pollution, water, air, and soil contamination, noise pollution; pollution measurement and quantification. Water and waste-water physical, chemical and biological characteristics; turbidity and colour, dissolved oxygen, hardness, pH, alkalinity, organic content, sampling and analysis, chemical and biochemical oxygen demand. Basic processes of treatment: flocculation and coagulation, sedimentation, filtration. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week, alternate weeks. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 372 "Transportation Engineering" "Prerequisite: BCEE 371; CIVI 341. Fields of transportation engineering; transportations roles in society; planning and design of road, rail, air, and water-way system components: terminals, right-of-way; control systems: evaluation of alternative modes and decision-making process; introduction to computer-aided design and management of systems. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
CIVI 381 "Hydraulics" "Prerequisite: ENGR 361, 391. Basic hydrodynamics; boundary layer theory, principle of energy losses. Steady flow in open channel; uniform flow, specific energy and critical flow, transition; gradually varied flow in channels and conduits, water surface profiles, computer applications. Flow measurement in open channel, weirs, overflow spillways. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 382 "Water Resources Engineering" "Prerequisite: CIVI 381; ENGR 391 or EMAT 391. Sources of water: surface water, groundwater, water quantities and requirements. Water use cycle. Characteristics of water and wastewater. Demand forecast, water use prediction and planning. Groundwater withdrawal and well hydraulics. Water supply network analysis, design of distribution systems, storage, pumping. Sanitary and storm water quantities, urban hydrology. Design of sewer systems, interceptors, gravity sewer, computer applications. Sustainable use of water resources. Design case studies. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 390 "Civil Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: CIVI 361; ENCS 282; BCEE 344 previously or concurrently. The project of each team will encompass the conceptual and preliminary design of a medium-size civil engineering project. Students learn civil engineering design process, methodology, identification of objectives, codes, formulation of design problems. Development and evaluation of sustainable design alternatives. Computer-aided design tools. Performance evaluation using modelling, sensitivity analysis, and cost estimation. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 432 "Soil Mechanics" "Prerequisite: ENGR 244. Index properties and classification of soils. Weight-volume relationships. Soil structures. Moisture-density relationships. Permeability, deformation, and strength of soils. Principle of total and effective stresses. Steady stage seepage through isotropic soil media. Stress distribution due to external loads and analysis of total settlements. Outline of theory of consolidation. Fundamentals of stability of earth retaining walls, slopes, and footings. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 435 "Foundation Design" "Prerequisite: CIVI 432. Site investigation. Shallow and deep foundations. Bearing capacity and settlement of foundations. Earth-retaining structures, sheet piles, cofferdams, anchors. Foundations subjected to dynamic loading. Foundations on difficult soils, soil improvement and underpinning. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
CIVI 437 "Advanced Geotechnical Engineering" "Prerequisite: CIVI 432. Mechanical properties of rocks and rock formations. Underground openings in rocks. Slope stability of stratified formations. Foundations on rocks. Rock bolting. Introduction of soil dynamics. Wave propagation in one and two dimensions in elastic media. Seismic waves. Foundations subjected to dynamic loading. Theory of liquefaction. Lectures: three hours per week."
CIVI 440 "Computer Applications in Civil Engineering Practice" "Prerequisite: BCEE 231; 75 credits in the program. General purpose IT tools for civil engineering applications: database programming and web-based tools. Introduction to remote sensing and GIS. Application of major software packages in selected areas of civil engineering practice with emphasis on modelling, data integration, and work-flow. Case studies in structural design, geotechnical engineering, transportation, and environmental engineering. Lectures: two hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week."
CIVI 453 "Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures" "Prerequisite: BCEE 342, 345. Two-way slab systems: flat plate, flat slab and slab-on-beams. Slender columns; columns subjected to biaxial bending. Calculation of lateral loads: wind and seismic. Lateral loads resisting systems: moment-resisting frames, shear walls and coupled shear walls. Prestressed concrete: losses, design requirements for flexure, shear, bond, anchorage and deflections. Design project. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 454 "Design of Steel Structures" "Prerequisite: BCEE 342, 344. Trends and developments in structural-steel design. Framing systems. Floor systems; composite construction; plate girders. Braced frames; moment-resisting frames. Connections. P-Delta effects. Introduction to steel-bridge design. Design project. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 464 "Environmental Impact Assessment" "Prerequisite: CIVI 361. Engineering activities and the environment; environmental ethics. Prediction and estimation of impact on air, water, soil quality, and biological, socio-economic, cultural environments. Water and air pollution laws, solid and hazardous waste laws. Environmental inventories, assessment preparation, and review. Federal and provincial laws and regulations on environmental assessment. Strategies for environmental compliance, resolution of environmental conflicts. Case studies. Lectures: three hours per week."
CIVI 465 "Water Pollution and Control" "Prerequisite: CIVI 361. Physical, chemical, and biological characteristics of water, water quality standards, reaction kinetics and material balances, eutrophication. Containment of reactive contaminants. Natural purification processes in water systems, adsorption, absorption; diffusion and dispersion, oxidation. Large-scale transport of contaminants, single and multiple source models; modelling of transport processes, computer simulation. Introduction to ground-water pollution, sea-water intrusion. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 466 "Engineering Aspects of Chemical and" "            Biological Processes"
CIVI 467 "Air Pollution and Emission Control" "Prerequisite: CIVI 361. Types of air pollutants. Sources of air pollutants, effects of air pollutants on health, vegetation, materials, and the atmosphere; emission standards. Meteorological considerations, dispersion of pollutants in the atmosphere, distribution and cleansing of particle matter, atmospheric photochemical reactions. Particulate pollutant control, source correction, cooling treatment; control of gaseous pollutant, point sources, odour control; measurement techniques; computer applications. Lectures: three hours per week."
CIVI 468 "Waste Management" "Prerequisite: CIVI 361. Solid waste; source and generation, sampling and analysis, collection, transport, and storage. Waste recycling, physical and chemical reduction; drying; energy recovery; disposal of solid waste. Sanitary and secure landfill planning, site selection, design and operation; chemical and biological reactions. Hazardous waste, chemical and physical characteristics, handling, processing, transportation, and disposal. Resource recovery alternatives, material exchanges, hazardous waste management facilities, incinerators, landfills. Lectures: three hours per week."
CIVI 469 "Geo-Environmental Engineering" "Prerequisite: CIVI 361. Structure and surface chemistry of soil, ion exchange, hydrolysis equilibrium, adsorption. Biochemical degradation, toxic contaminants. Mechanical and thermodynamic equilibrium in soil. Geotechnical considerations in environmental design; soil decontamination. Barrier technologies and soil interaction. Landfill covers and leachate collection systems; subsurface investigation, soil-gas survey. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 471 "Highway and Pavement Design" "Prerequisite: BCEE 371; CIVI 372. Design criteria, including capacity and level of service; route alignment and right-of-way considerations; geometric design; earthworks and construction practices. Pavement materials and tests. Flexible and rigid pavement design procedures; subgrade, base, and surfacing characteristics; loads; stresses in pavement systems; material characterization; pavement response models; effects of natural forces, and construction practices. Pavement management. Computer applications. Geometric and pavement design projects. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
CIVI 474 "Transportation Planning and Design" "Prerequisite: CIVI 372. Transportation planning process; data collection and demand analysis; trip generation, trip distribution, modal split and route assignment; forecasting travel patterns. Design of transportation facilities: street sections, intersections, and parking areas. Computer applications and design projects. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 483 "Hydrology" "Prerequisite: CIVI 381. Weather elements; precipitation, stage-discharge relations; evapo-transpiration; ground-water flow; stream-flow hydrography, unit hydrography, synthetic hydrographs; laminar flow; hydrologic routing; instantaneous hydrograph; hydraulic routing, method of characteristics, kinematic routing; statistical analysis, confidence intervals, stochastic generator, autoregressive model; applications of hydrology. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
CIVI 484 "Hydraulic Engineering" "Prerequisite: CIVI 381. Development of surface water resource; basic measurements in hydraulic engineering; storage reservoirs; practical problems; run-off characteristics of natural steams; probabilistic models; control structures; economic analysis; production function; project optimization; energy dissipators; sediment transportation; elements of river engineering; navigation; control of floods; computer modelling application. Design examples. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
CIVI 490 "Capstone Civil Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: Minimum of 75 credits in BEng (Civil) including ENGR 301; CIVI 361, 390; BCEE 344, 345. The project of each team will encompass the integrated design of at least two sub-disciplines of civil engineering to achieve high performance at reasonable cost. Through case studies and literature survey, students learn the information gathering and decision/design process, problem resolution, and aspects related to management, teamwork, and communication. Students registering for this course must contact the course coordinator for the detailed procedure. Lectures: two hours per week, two terms."
CIVI 498 "Topics in Civil Engineering" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course may be offered in a given year upon the recommendation of the Department and approval of GCS Council. The course content may vary from offering to offering and will be chosen to complement the available elective courses. Lectures: three hours per week."
COEN 231 "Introduction to Discrete Mathematics" "Prerequisite: MATH 204 (Cegep Mathematics 105). Fundamentals of logic: basic connectives and truth tables; logical equivalence; the laws of logic; logical implication; rules of inference; the use of quantifiers; proofs of theorems. Sets: the laws of set theory. Boolean algebra. Relation of Boolean algebra to logical and set theoretic operations. Modulo arithmetic: division algorithm. Induction and recursion: induction on natural numbers; recursive definitions. Functions and relations: cartesian products and relations; functions; function composition and inverse functions; equivalence relations. Elements of graph theory: basic definitions of graph theory; paths, reachability and connectedness; computing paths from their matrix representation; traversing graphs represented as adjacency lists; trees and spanning trees. Finite-state machines (FSM) deterministic and nondeterministic machines; regular languages; FSM with output; composition of FSM. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
COEN 243 "Programming Methodology I" "Prerequisite: MATH 204 (Cegep Mathematics 105). Introduction to computer hardware and software, programming and programming paradigms; essential procedural programming languages: key elements; reserved words and identifiers; data types and declarations; statements; arithmetic expressions; different modes of execution. Flow control using If-Else and Switch statements. Repetition using loops. Recursive functions. Pointers, references and dynamic data structures, function pointer; Lambda expression; data structures; built-in arrays, template arrays and vectors, n-dimensional vectors; sorting and searching; object-oriented programming. User-defined classes. Class attributes and methods. Object creation, use and destruction. Introduction to exception handling. Introduction to UML class diagrams. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
COEN 244 "Programming Methodology II" "Prerequisite: COEN 243 or MECH 215. Review of object-oriented programming and further concepts. Revisiting pointers. Operator overloading: regular and advanced usage. Fundamentals of file and stream processing. Class composition and inheritance: regular and advanced usage. Virtual functions. Polymorphism. Static and dynamic binding. Abstract classes. Case study of a small-scale object-oriented project: simplified analysis, design, and implementation. Files and streams, exception handling: advanced usage. Templates: class templates, template instantiation, type binding; sequence containers and STL algorithms; UML modelling; introduction to open software repository. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
COEN 311 "Computer Organization and Software" "Prerequisite: COEN 212, 243. Introduction and terminology. Review of data representation and arithmetic. Floating-point representation and arithmetic. Functional units: CPU, memory, I/O, computer operation. Machine programming fundamentals: instruction structure, addressing modes, the assembly process, examples of architectures. Case study of a microprocessor architecture: programming model, assembler and addressing modes, instruction set and formats; programming examples. Stacks, subroutines, macros, exceptions, interrupts. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
COEN 313 "Digital Systems Design II" "Prerequisite: COEN 212, 231. Two-level and multi-level logic optimization techniques. Hardware description languages (VHDL) for synthesis and simulation. Asynchronous design. Algorithmic state machines. Clocking and clock skew. Metastability. Self-timed concepts. Finite state machine (FSM) optimization. State reduction. FSM partitioning. Programmable logic devices and field programmable gate arrays. Data path and control design for processors. Testing issues. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
COEN 315 "Digital Electronics" "Prerequisite: ELEC 311. Analysis and simulation of basic digital circuit blocks, in particular, CMOS, BiCMOS and ECL technologies. The focus is on the electronics aspect of digital circuits. Combinational and sequential circuit units, including logic gates, flip-flops, signal generators, static and dynamic memories, and interconnections. Performance analysis in terms of switching speeds, power dissipation, noise immunity, fan-in and fan-out. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
COEN 316 "Computer Architecture and Design" "Prerequisite: COEN 311, 313. Review of basic computer architecture designs. Fundamentals of computer design and performance. Cost issues. Instruction set design principles. Memory hierarchies: registers, caches, and virtual memories. Basic processor implementation issues. High performance computing issues such as pipelining, superscalar, and vector processing. Input/output subsystem designs. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
COEN 317 "Microprocessor Systems" "Prerequisite: COEN 311 or COMP 228 or SOEN 228; COEN 313. Introduction to microprocessor interfacing. Bus functions, bus interconnections, synchronous and asynchronous bus. Signal flow and data transfer, decoding for I/O and memory, memory organization and structures. Interfacing examples; parallel interfacing, serial interfacing, the interrupt system; bus arbitration and DMA. Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog structures and interfacing. Custom hardware units and multi-core systems. Benchmarking and comparative study of recent microprocessor systems. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
COEN 320 "Introduction to Real-Time Systems" "Prerequisite: COEN 346 or COMP 346. Fundamentals of real-time systems: definitions, requirements, design issues and applica-tions. Real-time operating systems (RTOS) feature: multi-tasking, process management, scheduling, interprocess communication and synchronization, real-time memory management, clocks and timers, interrupt and exception handling, message queues, asynchronous input/output. Concurrent programming languages: design issues and examples, POSIX threads and semaphores. Introduction to real-time uniprocessor scheduling policies: static vs. dynamic, pre-emptive vs. non-pre-emptive, specific techniques  rate-monotonic algorithm, earliest-deadline-first, deadline monotonic, least-laxity-time-first; clock-driven scheduling. Design and specification techniques  Finite state machine based State-chart, Dataflow diagram, Petri nets. Reliability and fault-tolerance. Case studies of RTOS  QNX, VxWorks, and research prototypes. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
COEN 345 "Software Testing and Validation" "Prerequisite: SOEN 341. Overview of the three phases and deliverables of a project. Validation vs. verification, reviews, walkthrough. Testing: acceptance testing, integration testing, module testing. Writing stubs. Performance testing. Role of formal methods. Code inspection. Defect tracking. Causality analysis. Software Metrics and quality management. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
COEN 346 "" "Prerequisite: COEN 311; COMP 352 or COEN 352. The evolution, architecture, and use of modern operating systems (OS). Multi-tasking, concurrency and synchronization, IPC, deadlock, resource allocation, scheduling, multi-threaded programming, memory and storage managements, file systems, I/O techniques, buffering, protection and security, the client/server paradigm and communications. Introduction to real time operating systems. Students write substantial programs dealing with concurrency and synchronization in a multi-tasking environment. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
COEN 352 "" "Prerequisite: COEN 231, 244. Mathematical introduction: mathematical induction, program analysis, and algorithm complexity. Fundamental data structures: lists, stacks, queues, and trees. Fundamental algorithms: hashing and sorting. Graph structures and algorithms. Overview of algorithm design techniques, including greedy algorithms, divide and conquer strategies, recursive and backtracking algorithms, and heuristics. Application of data structures and algorithms to engineering. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
COEN 390 "Computer Engineering Product Design Project" "Prerequisite: Minimum of 45 credits in BEng (Computer); COEN 244, 311; ENGR 290, 301. The Product Design Project reinforces skills introduced in ENGR 290, which include teamwork, project management, engineering design for a complex problem, technical writing, and technical presentation in a team environment. It also introduces students to product development. Students are assigned to teams and each team develops, defines, designs and builds a system and/or device under broad constraints set by the Department. Students present their product definition and design, and demonstrate that their system/device works at the end of the term. Tutorial: two hours per week. Equivalent laboratory time: six hours per week."
COEN 413 "Hardware Functional Verification " "Prerequisite: COEN 313. Review of hardware design languages. Introduction to functional verification. Design for verification. Writing test benches, simulation engines, and coverage metrics. Introduction to verification languages. Verification plan: strategies, test cases, test benches. Modelling verification environments. Modelling input relations, intervals, events. Introduction to formal verification tools. Lectures: three hours per week."
COEN 421 "Embedded Systems Design" "Prerequisite: COEN 317, 320; SOEN 341. Embedded systems, foundations for cyber-physical systems design. Embedded HW architectures, sensors, actuators, processors. IO and peripherals, memory architectures, interfacing memory and peripheral. Hardware-software partitioning, software transformations, floating to fixed point conversion, loop transformations, code compaction, low-power design and embedded system testing. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 30 hours total."
COEN 422 "Cyber-Physical Systems" "Prerequisite: COEN 320; ELEC 372. Models of computation for cyber-physical systems. Models for computation and physical systems. Discrete event dynamic models, finite-state machines (FSMs). Extended FSMs, statecharts, petri nets. Continuous variable models. Scheduling and optimization of process networks, hybrid models. Specification, simulation and performance analysis of cyber-physical systems. Relationship of program execution with physical time constants. Lectures: three hours per week."
COEN 424 "Programming on the Cloud" "Prerequisite: COEN 346. Autonomy of cloud computing, service and business models, data centres and virtualization. CAP theorem, REST API and data models. Map reduce and programming model of distributed data processing on computer clusters. Distributed file systems for computer clusters, development environments and tools on clouds. Cloud-based data access and query. Cloud application design principles. Lectures: three hours per week."
COEN 432 "Applied Evolutionary and Learning Algorithms" "Prerequisite: COEN 352 or COMP 352. Heuristic learning algorithms applied to real-world problems of design, classification, prediction and abstraction. Genetic algorithms, genetic programming, evolutionary strategies, generative and developmental systems, artificial life approaches, swarm intelligence, self-modifying programs, tabu search, simulated annealing and support vector machines, introduction to deep learning architectures. Examples of practical applications and challenges focused on biological and biomedical engineering. Lectures: three hours per week."
COEN 433 "Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology" "Prerequisite: COEN 212, 244. Introduction to the cell and the genome. Foundations of synthetic biology and ethics. Synthetic genomes and metabolic engineering. Model organisms, such as E. coli bacteria and synthetic cells, self-replicating cells man-made from cloned genes, a cellular membrane and the basic elements of RNA and protein synthesis. Designing computational devices for implementation in biological cells. Introduction to modelling and computer simulation of gene regulatory networks. Methods of building and testing gene regulatory networks within and without cells. Expanding functionality via inter-cellular signaling. Basic interfacing to electronic sensors and actuators. Landmark and interesting applications of synthetic biology in computer engineering and other disciplines. Lectures: three hours per week."
COEN 434 "Microfluidic Devices for Synthetic Biology" "Prerequisite: COEN 244 and ENGR 290; or BIOL 261 and COMP 249. Introduction to microfluidic components (pumps, valves, automation) programming microfluidics, paradigms, and applications for chemical and biological analysis. Introduction to synthetic biology; biological parts and their properties, network structure and pathway engineering, synthetic networks, manipulating DNA and measuring responses, basic behaviour of genetic circuits, building complex genetic networks; integration of microfluidics and synthetic biology; economic implications. Lectures: three hours per week."
COEN 445 "Communication Networks and Protocols" "Prerequisite: COEN 346. Communications protocols basics, flow control, error detection and error control techniques. Network topologies including local area networks (LANs) and wide area networks (WANs). Layered architecture standards (OSI and TCP/IP) and protocols. Internetworking. Application and socket programming. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
COEN 446 "Internet of Things" "Prerequisite: COEN 445 or ELEC 463. From internet and devices to internet of things (IoT), business models and applications including health monitoring and smart cities. Devices and their connection including wireless sensor networks (WSN). Constraints and requirements. Network access protocols, routing protocols (RPL), transport layer and message queuing telemetry transport (MQTT). Constrained application protocol (CoAP) and efficient XML interchange (EXI). Protocol stack and contrast with internet stack. Security threats. Introduction to IoT analytics. Platforms and tools. Lectures: three hours per week."
COEN 447 "Software-Defined Networking" "Prerequisite: COEN 317; COEN 445 or ELEC 463. Control and data planes, centralized vs. distributed control. Network operating systems, network function virtualization. Programmable data planes, network processors, programmable switch pipelines. High-level data-plane programming with P4 and data plane development kit. Software-defined network emulation project. Lectures: three hours per week."
COEN 451 "VLSI Circuit Design" "Prerequisite: COEN 212; ELEC 311. Analysis and design of electronic circuits using Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) technologies. Physical design of MOS digital circuits. CMOS circuit schematic and layout. CMOS processing technology, design rules and CAD issues. Physical layers and parasitic elements of CMOS circuits. Characterization and performance evaluation. Constraints on speed, power dissipation and silicon space consumption. Design and implementation of CMOS logic structures, interconnections and I/O structures. Circuit design project using a specified CMOS technology. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 30 hours total."
COEN 490 "Capstone Computer Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: Minimum of 75 credits in BEng (Computer) or permission of the Department; ENGR 371; COEN 352, 390; ELEC 311 or SOEN 341. Students are assigned to groups, and work together under faculty supervision to solve a complex interdisciplinary design problem  typically involving communications, control systems, electromagnetics, power electronics, software design, and/or hardware design. The project fosters teamwork between group members and allows students to develop their project management, technical writing, and technical presentation skills. Tutorial: one hour per week, two terms. Equivalent laboratory time: four hours per week, two terms."
COEN 498 "Topics in Computer Engineering" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. The course, when offered, will include topics which complement elective courses in computer engineering and computer science. Lectures: three hours per week."
ELEC 251 "Fundamentals of Applied Electromagnetics" "Prerequisite: ELEC 273 or ENGR 273; ENGR 233 previously or concurrently. Electric charge, Coulombs law, electrostatic forces, electric field, Gauss law, electric potential, stored energy. Dielectrics, properties of materials in electric fields. Electric current, conduction in a vacuum and in material media, displacement current, magnetic field of a current, force on a current-carrying wire, magnetic induction, electromotive force, energy stored in a magnetic field. Magnetism in material media, magnetic circuits. Time-varying fields. Capacitance, resistance, inductance, elements of electric circuits. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
ELEC 273 "Basic Circuit Analysis" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213 previously or concurrently; PHYS 205. Units: current, voltage, power, and energy. Elementary wave-forms. Time averages. Ohms law. KVL and KCL. Ideal sources. Mesh and node analysis of resistive circuits. Network theorems. Inductors and capacitors and their response to the application of elementary waveforms. Transient response of simple circuits. Natural frequency and damping. Initial conditions. Steady state AC analysis: resonance, impedance, power factor. Delta and Y connections. Ideal operational amplifiers. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 275 "Principles of Electrical Engineering" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213 previously or concurrently; PHYS 205. Fundamentals of electric circuits: Kirchoffs laws, voltage and current sources, Ohms law, series and parallel circuits. Nodal and mesh analysis of DC circuits. Superposition theorem, Thevenin and Norton Equivalents. Use of operational amplifiers. Transient analysis of simple RC, RL and RLC circuits. Steady state analysis: Phasors and impedances, power and power factor. Single and three phase circuits. Magnetic circuits and transformers. Power generation and distribution. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 311 "Electronics I" "Prerequisite: ELEC 273. Diodes: terminal characteristics of junction diodes; analysis of diode circuits; the small signal model and its application; operation in the reverse-breakdown region  Zener diodes; rectifiers, limiting and clamping circuits. Principle of signal amplification: small signal models; linearity; loading effects; cascaded amplifiers. MOSFETs: structure and physical operation; current-voltage characteristics; MOSFET as switch, DC analysis; biasing considerations; small signal analysis, models and parameters; three basic configurations: common gate, common source, common drain, or amplification. Overview of BJT circuits: structure and physical operation of BJT; DC analysis; biasing considerations: small signal analysis and parameters; basic configurations for amplification. PSPICE: laboratory pre-labs and extensive simulation exercises. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 312 "Electronics II" "Prerequisite: ELEC 311; ELEC 242 or 364. Differential and multi-stage amplifiers: differential pair; differential gain; common-mode gain and common-mode rejection ratio (CMRR) current mirrors. High frequency models: s-domain analysis, transfer functions; common gate, common source, common drain configurations; common base, common emitter, common collector configurations; wide-band amplifiers. Feedback: general feedback structure; properties of negative feedback; the four basic feedback configurations; loop gain and stability problems. Power amplifiers: classification and output stages; class A, B, C, and AB amplifiers; biasing the class AB amplifier. Introduction to filters, tuned amplifiers, oscillators and mixers. PSPICE: Laboratory pre-labs and extensive simulation exercises. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 321 "Introduction to Semiconductor Materials and Devices" "Prerequisite: CHEM 205; ENGR 213. Fundamentals underlying optical and electronic devices. The structure and growth of crystals. The energy band model for elemental and compound semiconductors. Electronic and optical properties of semiconductors. Electroluminescence and photoluminescence. The semiconductor in equilibrium. Carrier transport and non-equilibrium phenomena. Introductions to junctions and devices. The laboratory demonstrates the basic electrical and optical properties of semiconductor materials. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 331 "Fundamentals of Electrical Power Engineering" "Prerequisite: ELEC 251, 273. Review of fundamentals of AC circuit analysis. Overview of power systems. Three-phase circuits: balanced three-phase circuits with star and delta connected loads, power measurements. Magnetic circuits. Transformers. Power conversion techniques: single phase AC/DC rectifiers, DC/DC choppers and DC/AC converters. DC machines: Operating principle, separately excited DC motor, torque speed characteristics and control methods using rectifiers and choppers. Induction machines: Theory of three-phase induction machines, equivalent circuit parameters, efficiency, torque speed characteristics and control methods using inverters. Overview of power distribution systems. Safety codes. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 342 "Discrete-Time Signals and Systems" "Prerequisite: ELEC 242 or 264. Discrete vs. continuous-time signals. Properties of discrete-time systems. Linear Time Invariant (LTI) systems. Unit impulse response and convolution. Systems based on linear constant-coefficient difference equations. Discrete Fourier series. The Fourier transform representation of signals and systems. Inverse Fourier transform. Sampling of continuous-time signals. Reconstruction of a signal from its samples. Discrete-time processing of continuous-time signals. Quantization. The Z-Transform and inverse Z-Transform. Unilateral Z-Transform. Transfer function and block diagram representation of LTI systems. Basic structures for Finite-Impulse-Response and Infinite-Impulse-Response filters. Computer-based MATLAB simulation. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 351 "Electromagnetic Waves and Guiding Structures" "Prerequisite: ELEC 251, 365. Maxwells equations. Differential forms of the laws of electromagnetism. Boundary conditions. Power and energy. Uniform plane waves. Transmission line theory. Rectangular waveguides. Antennas. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
ELEC 353 "Transmission Lines, Waves and Signal Integrity" "Prerequisite: ELEC 242 or 264; ENGR 233. Transmission lines and high-speed logic design. Intersymbol interference and eye patterns. Transmission line circuits in the frequency domain, rise time and bandwidth of digital signals. Maxwells equations, plane waves, and antennas. Wireless communications and indoor propagation. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
ELEC 365 "Complex Variables and Partial Differential Equations " "Prerequisite: ENGR 213, 233. Review of complex arithmetic. Analytic functions. Taylor and Laurent series. Residue theory. Fourier series. Partial differential equations. Applications to Laplace, heat, and wave equations. Bessel and Legendre functions. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
ELEC 367 "Introduction to Digital Communications" "Prerequisite: ELEC 342 or 364; ENGR 371. Analog communications and frequency multiplexing; pulse-code-modulation and time multiplexing; additive white Gaussian noise; matched filter and correlator receiver; maximum likelihood receiver and error probability; intersymbol interference, pulse shaping filter; Signal Space Analysis; Union Bound on the probability of error; Pass-band communication Systems; coherent and non-coherent communication systems. Introduction to synchronization. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total. Tutorial: one hour per week."
ELEC 372 "Fundamentals of Control Systems" "Prerequisite: ELEC 242 or 364. Mathematical models of control systems. Characteristics, performance, and stability of linear feedback control systems. Root-locus methods. Frequency response methods. Stability in the frequency domain. Design and compensation of feedback control systems. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 390 "Electrical Engineering Product Design Project" "Prerequisite: Minimum of 45 credits in BEng (Electrical); COEN 244; ELEC 311; ENGR 290, 301. The Product Design Project reinforces skills introduced in ENGR 290, which include teamwork, project management, engineering design for a complex problem, technical writing, and technical presentation in a team environment. It also introduces students to product development. Students are assigned to teams and each team develops, defines, designs and builds a system and/or device under broad constraints set by the Department. Students present their product definition and design, and demonstrate that their system/device works at the end of the term. Tutorial: two hours per week. Equivalent laboratory time: six hours per week."
ELEC 413 "Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems" "Prerequisite: ELEC 312, 372. Overview of wireline communication links, mechanisms of signal degradation, modulation formats, TX/RX synchronization options, IC technology limitations, transmitter front-end circuits, receiver front-end circuits, decision circuits, clock and data recovery systems, phase-locked loops, jitter, continuous-time and discrete-time equalizers, system metrics. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 30 hours total."
ELEC 421 "Solid State Devices" "Prerequisite: ELEC 321. Junction theory (PN junctions, Schottky and ohmic contacts, hetero-junctions). Structures and charac-teristics of diodes, solar cells, bipolar transistors, and fundamentals of MOSFETs. Planar silicon junctions and transistors will be designed, fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory, including resistivity measurements, semiconductor cleaning, oxidation, diffusion, photolithography, etching, metallization, and comparison of design with experimental results. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 422 "Design of Integrated Circuit Components" "Prerequisite: ELEC 421. Structures, characteristics and design of MOS capacitors and MOSFETs. FinFETs, SOI FETs, velocity-modulation transistors, and HFETs. Role of strain in operation of modern FETs. Planar MOS devices, including capacitors and MOSFETs will be designed, fabricated, and evaluated in the laboratory. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 423 "Introduction to Analog VLSI" "Prerequisite: ELEC 312. CMOS transistor layout considerations, design rules, circuit extraction. MOSFET modelling, I-V equations, AC equivalent circuits for high-frequency operation, computer-based simulation. Analysis and design of small-scale integrated circuit building blocks including MOS switch, active resistor, current source, current mirror, voltage amplifiers, voltage-reference circuits, multipliers. Analysis and design of medium-scale integrated circuit building blocks including op-amps, fully-differential op-amp and common mode feedback circuits, transconductance amplifiers, transimpedance amplifiers, comparators. Noise analysis. Mismatch analysis and modelling, offset removal techniques. Analog VLSI system examples. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 30 hours total."
ELEC 424 "VLSI Process Technology" "Prerequisite: ELEC 311, 321. Introduction to basic VLSI technologies; crystal growth, thermal oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation, chemical vapour deposition, wet and dry etching, and lithography. Layout, yield, and VLSI process integration. The lab demonstrates a semiconductor device fabrication process. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 425 "Optical Devices for High-Speed Communications" "Prerequisite: ELEC 321, 351. Optical properties of semiconductors. Fundamental principles for understanding and applying optical fibre technology. Fundamental behaviour of the individual optical components and their interactions with other devices. Lasers, LEDs, optical fibres, light detectors, optical switches. Concepts of WDM and DWDM. Components required for WDM and DWDM. A comprehensive treatment of the underlying physics: noise and distortion in optical communications, light polarization, modulation and attenuation. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 430 "Electrical Power Equipment" "Prerequisite : ELEC 331. Components of a transmission system. Transmission line; modelling and parameters. Transformers: equivalent circuits, losses, connections and protection. Breakers: operation and design. Compensation equipment: capacitors, inductors, series and shunt connections. Insulation coordination. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 431 "Electrical Power Systems" "Prerequisite: ELEC 331. Inductance, capacitance, resistance of polyphase transmission lines; current and voltage relations of transmission lines; load flow studies; symmetrical and unsymmetrical faults; power system stability. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 432 "Control of Electrical Power Conversion Systems" "Prerequisite: ELEC 331, 372. Basic considerations and control requirements. Control system principles and structures. Controller characteristics and operation. Static power conversion systems. Electromechanical systems and electrical machine modelling. Control system design. Applications to electric motor drives and typical power conversion systems. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 433 "Power Electronics" "Prerequisite: ELEC 311, 331. Review of basic electrical concepts. Power electronic systems. Power semiconductor switches. AC controllers. Line frequency AC-DC converters: diodes and thyristor circuits. DC-DC converters. DC-AC converters. Utility applications: STATCOM and power electronic interfaces. Industrial and utility applications. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 434 "Behaviour of Power Systems" "Prerequisite: ELEC 331. Introduction: classification of phenomena, structure of power systems. Review of component models: lines, transformers, electrical machines and load. Excitation systems of machines. Steady-state operation. Transient stability, voltage stability and small signal stability. Compensation methods: stabilizer, series and shunt compensators. Sub-synchronous resonances. Transient electromagnetic phenomena. Methods and tools for numerical simulation. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 435 "Electromechanical Energy Conversion Systems" "Prerequisite: ELEC 331. Lumped parameter concepts of electromechanics. Energy, co-energy in the derivation of torques and forces. Examples of electric machines: dc, synchronous and induction types. Steady-state, transient and stability analysis. Power electronic controllers. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 436 "Protection of Power Systems" "Prerequisite: ELEC 331. General aspects of protection systems. Measurement transformers. Grounding. Overcurrent and ground fault protection. Protection of transformers, shunt capacitors and buses. Protection of transmission lines. Telecommunication for protection and automation systems. Protection of inverters. Protection of distribution networks. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 437 "Renewable Energy Systems " "Prerequisite: ELEC 331. Electrical basics and models of solar energy (photo-voltaics), electrical power from wind energy, electrical power from water, including wave energy, tidal energy, micro-hydro. Case studies, for example the application of solar PV to street lighting. Electrical engineering design implications. Design assignments. Lectures: three hours per week."
ELEC 438 "Industrial Electrical Systems" "Prerequisite: ELEC 331. Structures of industrial power systems. Voltage levels. Electric installations, codes and standards. Short-circuits, protection and coordination. Grounding. Power quality. Power factor, tariffs and energy management. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 439 "Hybrid Electric Vehicle Power System Design and Control" "Prerequisite: ELEC 331. Introduction to Electric Vehicles (EV), Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEV). Vehicle design fundamentals. Traction motors for EV/HEV propulsion. On-board energy sources and storage devices: high-voltage traction batteries, fuel cells, ultra-capacitors, flywheels. Power electronic converters and control. Various EV/HEV/Fuel Cell Vehicle topologies and modelling. Energy management strategies. Practical design considerations. Engineering impact of electric, hybrid electric, and fuel cell vehicles. Lectures: three hours per week."
ELEC 440 "Controlled Electric Drives " "Prerequisite: ELEC 331, 372. Elements of a drive system, characteristics of common mechanical systems, drive characteristics, operation in one, two, or four quadrants. Fully controlled rectifier drives, braking of DC motors, control of DC motors using DC/DC converters. Control of polyphase induction motors, voltage-source and current-source inverter drives, frequency-controlled induction motor drives, introduction to vector control of induction motor drives, field oriented control, sensor-less operation. Control of synchronous motors, permanent magnet motors. Switched reluctance motor drives, stepper motors. Brushless DC motor drives, low-power electronic motor drives. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 441 "Modern Analog Filter Design" "Prerequisite: ELEC 342 or 364. Review of network analysis. Magnitude and frequency scaling. Magnitude and phase approximation in synthesis of filter functions. Second-order active RC filters. Synthesis of all-pole LC ladder filters. Second-order switched-capacitor filters. Realization of high-order active filters. Current mode filters. Switched-current filters. Integrated circuit filters. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 442 "Digital Signal Processing" "Prerequisite: ELEC 342 or 364; ENGR 371. Review of Z-transform; linear phase and non-linear phase systems; all-pass and minimum phase systems, recursive and non-recursive digital filters; common digital filter structures, common design approaches for digital filters; description of typical Digital Signal Processor chips; Review of sampling, reconstruction, interpolation and decimation; changing the sampling rate by integer and non-integer factor; multirate signal processing, polyphase decomposition, multirate filter banks; digital processing of analog signals, A/D and D/A converters; discrete Fourier transform; random signals, Least-Mean-Square (LMS) filters. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 444 "Medical Image Processing" "Prerequisite: ELEC 342 or 364. Principles and techniques used in the processing and analysis of medical images. Image quality metrics, denoising medical images, quantification, rigid and deformable registration. Similarity metrics such as mutual information (MI). Images from the most common medical imaging modalities (X-ray, CT, MRI and ultrasound) will be used. Lectures: three hours per week."
ELEC 445 "Biological Signal Processing" "Prerequisite: ELEC 442. This course covers signal processing through discussion of current bioengineering activities which rely on signal processing and include assessment of neural function with simultaneous collection of electroencephalogram (EEG) and functional MRI data; the non-invasive assessment of cardiac autonomic regulation using electrocardiography; assessment of neural function using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS); assessment of muscle activity using electromyography (EMG). Topics include modern spectral analysis, time-frequency analysis (short-time Fourier transforms and wavelets); signal modelling; multivariate analyses and adaptive filtering. Lectures: three hours per week."
ELEC 453 "Microwave Engineering" "Prerequisite: ELEC 351. Properties of waveguides, striplines, and microstrips. Scattering parameters. Butterworth and Chebyshev impedance transformers. Microwave couplers, cavities, and Fabry-Perot resonators. Periodic structures. Microwave filter design. Faraday rotation and non-reciprocal devices. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 455 "Acoustics" "Prerequisite: ELEC 351. Sound generation and propagation in elastic media; conversion between acoustical, electrical, and mechanical energy. Lumped-parameter approximations, sound in rooms, underwater acoustics, microphones; loudspeakers and audio communications problems; noise and vibration control problems. Lectures: three hours per week."
ELEC 456 "Antennas" "Prerequisite: ELEC 351. Antenna fundamentals and definitions. Radiation integrals. Dipoles and loops. Arrays. Antenna self and mutual impedance. Matching techniques. Travelling wave antennas. Broadband antennas. Equivalence principle. Aperture antennas. Antenna measurement techniques. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 457 "Design of Wireless RF Systems" "Prerequisite: ELEC 453. Introduction to wireless systems. Noise and distortion in microwave systems. Antennas and propagation. Amplifiers. Mixers. Transistor oscillators and frequency synthesizers. Modulation techniques. Receiver design. Use of RF CAD tools. Lectures: three hours per week."
ELEC 458 "" "Prerequisite: ELEC 351 or 353. Introduction to EMC procedures, control plans, and specifications. Radiated and conducted susceptibility and emission testing. Introduction to EMC antennas, antenna concepts, electric and magnetic dipoles, biconical dipoles, conical log spiral antennas, setting up fields for susceptibility testing, measuring radiation from equipment. Coupled transmission lines, pulse propagation, closely spaced parallel transmission lines, capacitive coupling, inductive coupling, shielding against magnetic fields. Shielding and enclosures, electric and magnetic field screening mechanisms, shielding effectiveness, grounding considerations. EMC test facilities, screened rooms, TEM cells, signals and spectra, intermodulation, cross-modulation, the spectrum analyzer. Noise and pseudo-random noise, noise performance of measurement/receiving systems, noise equivalent bandwidth, noise figure, antenna noise temperature and S/N ratio. Lectures: three hours per week."
ELEC 463 "Telecommunication Networks" "Prerequisite: COEN 244; ELEC 342 or 364; ENGR 371. Communication networks and services; introduction to layered network architectures; transmission systems and the telephone network: multiplexing, circuit switches, routing and signalling; peer-to-peer protocols: ARQ protocols, data-link controls, packet multiplexing; multiple access communications: Aloha, CSMA, reservation schemes, polling, token-passing ring, LAN standards, LAN bridges; packet-switching networks: datagrams and virtual circuits; TCP/IP architecture: Internet protocol, transmission control protocol. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 464 "Wireless Communications" "Prerequisite: ELEC 367. Introduction to error control coding: linear block codes, syndrome-based decoding, coding vs. modulation, convolutional codes, Viterbi decoder. Communications link analysis. Introduction to cellular systems: frequency reuse, trunking and grade of services, sectoring and cell splitting, coverage and capacity. Modulation techniques for mobile communications. Mobile radio channels. Spread-spectrum techniques. Multiplexing and multiple access techniques. Wireless standards from first generation to fourth generation; OFDM: an architecture for the fourth generation. Lectures: three hours per week."
ELEC 465 "Networks Security and Management" "Prerequisite: COEN 445 or ELEC 463. Network security threats. Importance of security policy. Principles and techniques of encryption and authentication. Network security protocols: X509, IPSEC (Internet Protocol Security Architecture). Network management: issues, architectures, and protocols. Fault management, configuration management, security management, performance management, and accounting management. Management Information Bases (MIBs). SNMP and its evolution. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 466 "Introduction to Optical Communication Systems" "Prerequisite: ELEC 351, 367. Overview of optical fibres and optical fibre communications. Signal propagation in optical fibres: attenuation, chromatic dispersion, mode coupling, and nonlinearities. Optical transmitters characteristics and requirements for optical networks. Power launching and coupling: optical transmitter-to-fibre coupling, fibre-to-fibre joints, and optical fibre connectors. Optical receivers: basic structures, noise analysis, characteristics and requirements for optical networks. Digital/analog transmissions: link power budget, rise-time budget, line coding, error correction, and noise effects on transmissions. WDM concepts: operation principle of WDM. Optical amplifiers: characteristics and requirements for optical networks, amplifier noise, system applications, and wavelength conversion. Optical networks: basic topologies, SONET/SDH, broadcast-and-select WDM networks, wavelength-routed networks. Optical measurements: test equipments, attenuation/dispersion measurements, OTDR, eye pattern and OSA. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 470 "Broadcast Signal Transmission" "Prerequisite: ELEC 363 or 367. Topics include signal definition, human eye limitations, pixel representation schemes, interfaces serial digital interface (SDI), image formats (1080i, 720i, 4k, 8k), compression schemes: MPEG-2, MPEG-4, moving JPEG. Modulation techniques: QPSK, QAM, VSB. Advanced terrestrial transmission standards such as DVB-T2, ATSC-3. Satellite broadcasting standards such as DVB/S2. Path calculation: antennas, up and down conversion, solid state and travelling wave tube amplifiers. Transmission lines, waveguide and coaxial cable. Lectures: three hours per week."
ELEC 472 "Advanced Telecommunication Networks" "Prerequisite: ELEC 463 or COEN 445. Routing in packet networks, shortest-path algorithms, Internet routing protocols, ATM networks: ATM and ATM adaptation layers, traffic management and QoS, congestion control, ATM signalling, advanced network architectures: classical IP over ATM, MPLS, integrated and differentiated services, mobile communications: wireless transmission, medium access control, GSM system, mobile IP, mobile transport layer and support for mobility. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 473 "Autonomy for Mobile Robots" "Prerequisite: ELEC 372; ENGR 371. Application of autonomous wheeled robots: autonomous cars, indoor robots, (off-road) unmanned ground vehicles. Robot motion models, robot odometry. Robot sensor models: beam models of range finders, feature-based measurement models. Occupancy grid mapping. The Bayes filter. The Kalman filter. The particle filter. Robot localization: particle filter localization, Kalman filter localization. Introduction to simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). A project is required. Lectures: three hours per week."
ELEC 481 "Linear Systems" "Prerequisite: AERO 371 or ELEC 372 or MECH 371. Review of matrix algebra. State-space description of dynamic systems: linearity, causality, time-invariance, linearization. Solution of state-space equations. Transfer function representation. Discrete-time models. Controllability and observability. Canonical forms and minimal-order realizations. Stability. Stabilizability and pole placement. Linear quadratic optimal control. Observer design. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 482 "System Optimization" "Prerequisite: ENGR 391 or EMAT 391. Linear least squares. Properties of quadratic functions with applications to steepest descent method, Newtons method and Quasi-Newton methods for nonlinear optimization. One-dimensional optimization. Introduction to constrained optimization, including the elements of Kuhn-Tucker conditions for optimality. Least p<sup>th</sup> and mini-max optimization. Application of optimization techniques to engineering problems. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 483 "" "Prerequisite: AERO 371 or ELEC 372; ELEC 342 or 364. Introduction to real-time computer control systems; a review of discrete-time signals and systems, difference equations, z-transform; sampled-data systems, sample and hold, discrete models; discrete equivalents of continuous-time systems; stability analysis; design specifications; design using root locus and frequency response methods; implementation issues including bumpless transfer, integral windup, sample rate selection, pre-filtering, quantization effects and computational delay; scheduling theory and priority assignment to control processes, timing of control loops, effects of missed deadlines; principles and characteristics of sensors and devices, embedded processors, processor/device interface. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: 15 hours total."
ELEC 490 "Capstone Electrical Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: Minimum of 75 credits in BEng (Electrical) or permission of the Department; ENGR 371; COEN 311; ELEC 342 or 364; ELEC 390. Students are assigned to groups, and work together under faculty supervision to solve a complex interdisciplinary design problem  typically involving communications, control systems, electromagnetics, power electronics, software design, and/or hardware design. The project fosters teamwork between group members and allows students to develop their project management, technical writing, and technical presentation skills. Tutorial: one hour per week, two terms. Equivalent laboratory time: four hours per week, two terms."
ELEC 498 "Topics in Electrical Engineering" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course may be offered in a given year upon the authorization of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department. The course content may vary from offering to offering and will be chosen to complement elective courses available in a given year."
IADI 401 "Undergraduate Aerospace Industry Project II" "Prerequisite: Pass in IADI 301. The activities associated with this course deal with participation in regular meetings at the Institute and with faculty and industry members, attendance at training sessions (as applicable), industry training and tours. A project is assigned to the students. Students are also required to prepare and present progress reports on their project. A final report of their project must be submitted to the director of CIADI. A grade of pass or fail will be awarded based on the evaluation of the above activities. Students wishing to use their research and design project for their capstone project (e.g. MECH 490, COEN 490) must receive written approval from the Capstone Design Project coordinator in their respective department at the commencement of their CIADI project, and meet all requirements set out by both CIADI and their individual department."
INDU 311 "Simulation of Industrial Systems" "Prerequisite: ENGR 371. Modelling techniques in simulation; application of discrete simulation techniques to model industrial systems; random number generation and testing; design of simulation experiments using different simulation languages; output data analysis. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks. Tutorial: one hour per week."
INDU 320 "Production Engineering" "Prerequisite: INDU 323. The systems approach to production. Interrelationships among the component blocks of the system: forecasting, aggregate planning, production, material and capacity planning, operations scheduling. An overview of integrated production planning and control including MRP II, Just in Time manufacturing (JIT)."
INDU 321 "Lean Manufacturing" "Prerequisite: INDU 320. Lean fundamentals; lean manufacturing; lean engineering; lean principles, tools and techniques, practices, and implementation; five Ss, process analysis/spaghetti charts, value engineering; value stream mapping; standardized work/standard times; set-up reduction/line balancing; unit manufacturing; cell layout/cellular manufacturing; total productive maintenance; kanban; lean supply chain management; transition-to-lean roadmap; people/organizational issues in the lean enterprise; Six Sigma; TOM; agile manufacturing. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
INDU 323 "Operations Research I" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213, 233; INDU 211. An introduction to deterministic mathematical models with emphasis on linear programming. Applications to production, logistics, and service systems. Computer solution of optimization problems. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
INDU 324 "Operations Research II" "Prerequisite: INDU 323. Integer programming (IP), including modelling and enumerative algorithms for solving IP problems; post-optimality analysis. Network flows, dynamic programming and non-linear programming. Applications in the design and operation of industrial systems. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
INDU 330 "Engineering Management" "Prerequisite: ENCS 282; ENGR 301 previously or concurrently. Organizational structures, their growth and change. Motivation, leadership, and group behaviour. Design of alternatives for improving organizational performance and effectiveness. Planning, organization and management of engineering projects. Management for total quality. Lectures: three hours per week."
INDU 342 "Logistics Network Models " "Prerequisite: INDU 324. Overview of transportation systems; airlines, railways, ocean liners, cargo, energy transportation and pipelines. Supply chain characterization. Site location. Distribution planning. Vehicle routing. Fleet scheduling. Crew scheduling. Demand management. Replenishment management. Revenue management. Geographic information systems. Real-time network control issues. Project. Lectures: three hours per week."
INDU 371 "Stochastic Models in Industrial Engineering" "Prerequisite: ENGR 371. Overview of probability theory; probability distributions; exponential model and Poisson process; discrete-time and continuous-time Markov chains; classification of states; birth and death processes; queuing theory. Application to industrial engineering problems. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
INDU 372 "Quality Control and Reliability" "Prerequisite: ENGR 371. Importance of quality; total quality management; statistical concepts relevant to process control; control charts for variables and attributes; sampling plans. Introduction to reliability models and acceptance testing; issues of standardization. Lectures: three hours per week."
INDU 410 "Safety Engineering" "Prerequisite: MECH 311. Engineering design for the control of workplace hazards. Occupational injuries and diseases. Codes and standards. Workplace Hazardous Materials Information Systems (WHMIS). Hazard evaluation and control. Design criteria. Risk assessment. Safety in the manufacturing environment. Applications in ventilation, air cleaning, noise and vibration. Lectures: three hours per week."
INDU 411 "Computer Integrated Manufacturing" "Prerequisite: MECH 311. Concepts and benefits of computer integrated manufacturing (CIM). Design for manufacturing. Computer-aided design, process planning, manufacturing (computer numerical control parts programming), and inspection. Robots in CIM. Production planning and scheduling in CIM. System integration. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
INDU 412 "Human Factors Engineering" "Prerequisite: ENGR 371. Elements of anatomy, physiology, and psychology; engineering anthropometry; human capacities and limitations; manual material handling; design of workplaces; human-machines system design; design of controls and displays; shift work. Applications to a manufacturing environment. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
INDU 421 "Facilities Design and Material Handling Systems" "Prerequisite: INDU 311 previously or concurrently; INDU 320. An introduction to planning and design of production and manufacturing. Facility layout and location. Material handling systems and equipment specifications. Computer-aided facilities planning. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
INDU 423 "Inventory Control" "Prerequisite: INDU 320. Inventory analysis and control systems; the role of forecasting in controlling inventories; the role of inventories in physical distribution; supply chain management; work in process inventories; inventory in just-in-time manufacturing systems. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
INDU 440 "Product Design and Development" "Prerequisite: MECH 311. Development processes and organizations, product planning, identifying customer needs, product specifications, concept generation, concept selection, concept testing, product architecture, industrial design, design for manufacturing, prototyping robust design, patents and intellectual property. Lectures: three hours per week."
INDU 441 "Introduction to Six Sigma " "Prerequisite: INDU 372. Overview of the Six Sigma concepts and tools. Six Sigma deployment practices: Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve and Control phases (DMAIC). Project development, and the DMAIC problem-solving approach. Project. Lectures: three hours per week."
INDU 466 "Decision Models in Service Sector" "Prerequisite: ENGR 371; INDU 320. Introduction to service strategy and operations. Service demand forecasting and development of new services. Service facility location and layout planning. Applications of decision models in service operations and service quality control. Cost analysis, queuing models, risk management and resource allocation models for service decisions. Service outsourcing and supply chain issues. Efficiency and effectiveness issues in different service sectors such as emergency force deployment, municipal resource allocation and health care. Case studies using operations research, operations management, and statistical techniques. Lectures: three hours per week."
INDU 475 "Advanced Concepts in Quality Improvement" "Prerequisite: INDU 372. Statistical experimental design issues such as randomized blocks, factorial designs at two levels, applications on factorial designs, building models, Taguchi methods. Lectures: three hours per week."
INDU 480 "Cases in Industrial Engineering " "Prerequisite: INDU 311, 324. This course uses the case teaching method to train industrial engineering students to analyze real-world situations using the tools of operations research. Students assume the roles of engineering consultants working together to solve a problem posed by the client in each case. As a consequence, students obtain experience dealing with all steps involved in solving a real problem, from identification of stakeholders, problem formulation and identification of data requirements, to model implementation and analysis of results. Students are required to participate in class discussions of the case and to present their solutions in either report or presentation form. Lectures: three hours per week."
INDU 490 "Capstone Industrial Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: 75 credits in the program; ENCS 282; ENGR 301; INDU 421 previously or concurrently. A supervised design, simulation or experimental capstone design project including a preliminary project proposal with complete project plan and a technical report at the end of the fall term; a final report by the group and individual oral presentation at the end of the winter term. Lectures: one hour per week, one term. Equivalent laboratory time: three hours per week, two terms."
INDU 498 "Topics in Industrial Engineering" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department Chair. This course may be offered in a given year upon the authorization of the Mechanical, Industrial and Aerospace Engineering Department. The course content may vary from offering to offering and will be chosen to complement the elective courses available in the Industrial Engineering program. Lectures: three hours per week."
MECH 215 "Programming for Mechanical and Industrial Engineers " "Prerequisite: MATH 204 (Cegep mathematics 105). Writing programs using assignment and sequences. Variables and types. Operators and expressions. Conditional and repetitive statements. Input and output. File access. Functions. Program structure and organization. Pointers and dynamic memory allocation. Introduction to classes and objects. Mechanical and industrial engineering applications. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: one hour per week."
MECH 221 "Materials Science" "Prerequisite: CHEM 205 (Cegep Chemistry 101). Relationships between properties and internal structure, atomic bonding; molecular, crystalline and amorphous structures, crystalline imperfections and mechanisms of structural change. Microstructures and their development from phase diagrams. Structures and mechanical properties of polymers and ceramics. Thermal, optical, and magnetic properties of materials. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
MECH 311 "Manufacturing Processes" "Prerequisite: MECH 313. Fundamentals of manufacturing processes and their limitations, metrology, machine shop practice, safety and health considerations, forming, conventional machining and casting processes, welding and joining, plastic production, and non-conventional machining techniques. Sustainable technologies. Laboratory includes instruction and practice on conventional machine tools and a manufacturing project. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week, including industrial visits and field trips to local industries. Laboratory: three hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 313 "Machine Drawing and Design" "Prerequisite: MECH 211. Introduction to engineering design and design process. Problem definition, solution formulation, model development and collaboration aspects of design process.The use of drawings and other graphical methods in the process of engineering design. Industrial standards and specifications, design of fits, linear and geometrical tolerances. Design projects based on design philosophies will involve design and selection of many standard machine components like mechanical drives, cams, clutches, couplings, brakes, seals, fasteners, springs, and bearings. Drawing representation of standard components. Design projects are an integral part of this course. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week. Laboratory: 12hours total."
MECH 321 "Properties and Failure of Materials" "Prerequisite: MECH 221. The service capabilities of alloys and their relationship to microstructure as produced by thermal and mechanical treatments; tensile and torsion tests; elements of dislocation theory; strengthening mechanisms; composite materials. Modes of failure of materials; fracture, fatigue, wear, creep, corrosion, radiation damage. Failure analysis. Material codes; material selection for design. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 343 "Theory of Machines" "Prerequisite: ENGR 213, 233, 243. Introduction to mechanisms; position and displacement; velocity; acceleration; synthesis of linkage; robotics; static force analysis; dynamic force analysis; forward kinematics and inverse kinematics; introduction to gear analysis and gear box design; kinematic analysis of spatial mechanisms. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 344 "Machine Element Design" "Prerequisite: ENGR 244; MECH 313; MECH 321, 343 previously or concurrently. Introduction to machine design; static failure theories; failure of ductile vs. brittle materials under static loading. Fatigue failure theories; fatigue loads; notches and stress concentrations; residual stresses; designing for high cycle fatigue. Design of shafts, keys and couplings. Design of spur gears. Spring design. Design of screws and fasteners. Design of bearings. Case studies. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
MECH 351 "Thermodynamics II" "Prerequisite: ENGR 251. Brief review of ideal gas processes. Semi-perfect gases and the gas tables. Mixtures of gases, gases and vapours, air conditioning processes. Combustion and combustion equilibrium. Applications of thermodynamics to power production and utilization systems: study of basic and advanced cycles for gas compression, internal combustion engines, power from steam, gas turbine cycles, and refrigeration. Real gases. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 352 "Heat Transfer I" "Prerequisite: ENGR 311, 361. Analytical and numerical methods for steady-state and transient heat conduction. Empirical and practical relations for forced- and free-convection heat transfer. Radiation heat exchange between black bodies, and between non-black bodies. Gas radiation. Solar radiation. Effect of radiation on temperature measurement. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 361 "Fluid Mechanics II" "Prerequisite: ENGR 361. Differential analysis of fluid flows, vorticity, stream function, stresses, and strains. Navier-Stokes equations and solutions for parallel flows. Eulers equations, irrotational and potential flows, plane potential flows. Viscous flows in pipes, laminar and turbulent flows, major and minor losses. Flow over immersed bodies, boundary layers, separation and thickness. Drag, lift and applications. Introduction to compressible flows, speed of sound, Mach cone, and some characteristics of supersonic flows. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 368 "Electronics for Mechanical Engineers " "Prerequisite: PHYS 205; ENGR 311 previously or concurrently. Dependent sources, voltage and current dividers, voltage and current sources, superposition, Thevenin and Norton equivalent sources, linear and nonlinear circuit analysis. Semiconductors and diodes. Bipolar Junction Transistors (BJT), Field Effect Transistors (FET); amplifiers and switches. Operational amplifiers; circuits and frequency response. Digital logic components and circuits. Digital systems. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 370 "Modelling and Analysis of Dynamic Systems" "Prerequisite: PHYS 205; ENGR 213; ENGR 311 previously or concurrently; ENGR 245 or 243. Definition and classification of dynamic systems and components. Modelling of dynamic systems containing individual or mixed mechanical, electrical, fluid and thermal elements. Block diagrams representation and simulation techniques using MATLAB/Simulink. Time domain analysis. Transient and steady-state characteristics of dynamic systems. Linearization. Transfer functions. Introduction to feedback control systems. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 371 "Analysis and Design of Control Systems" "Prerequisite: ENGR 311; MECH 370. Stability of linear feedback systems. Root-Locus method. Frequency response concepts. Stability in the frequency domain. Feedback system design using Root Locus techniques. Compensator concepts and configurations. PID-controller design. Simulation and computer-aided controller design using Matlab/Simulink. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: three hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 375 "Mechanical Vibrations" "Prerequisite: AERO 371 or MECH 370. Transient vibrations under impulsive shock and arbitrary excitation: normal modes, free and forced vibration. Multi-degree of freedom systems, influence coefficients, orthogonality principle, numerical methods. Continuous systems; longitudinal torsional and flexural free and forced vibrations of prismatic bars. Lagranges equations. Vibration measurements. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 390 "Mechanical Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: ENCS 282; MECH 311, 343; MECH 344 previously or concurrently. The design process; product cost, quality and time to market, open and concept design problems, problem description. Geometric and type synthesis. Direct and inverse design problems. Material selection and load determination. Mathematical modelling, analysis, and validation. Introduction to Computer-Aided Design and Engineering (CAD and CAE). Product evaluation for performance, tolerance, cost, manufacture, assembly, and other measures. Design documentation. A team-based design project is an intrinsic part of this course. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: two hours per week."
MECH 411 "Instrumentation and Measurements" "Prerequisite: ENGR 311; AERO 371 or MECH 370. Unified treatment of measurement of physical quantities; static and dynamic characteristics of instruments  calibration, linearity, precision, accuracy, and bias and sensitivity drift; sources of errors; error analysis; experiment planning; data analysis techniques; principles of transducers; signal generation, acquisition and processing; principles and designs of systems for measurement of position, velocity, acceleration, pressure, force, stress, temperature, flow-rate, proximity detection. The course includes demonstration of various instruments. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 412 "Computer-Aided Mechanical Design" "Prerequisite: MECH 313. Introduction to computational tools in the design process. Introduction to the fundamental approaches to computer-aided geometric modelling, physical modelling and engineering simulations. Establishing functions and functional specifications with emphasis on geometric tolerancing and dimensioning, manufacturing and assembly evaluation. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 414 "Computer Numerically Controlled Machining" "Prerequisite: MECH 311, 412. Computer aided design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM) hardware and software. Essentials of Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machine tools and systems. Process planning and tooling systems for CNC machining. Theory of CNC programming of sculptured parts. Multi-axis CNC tool path generation. Project using CAD/CAM software; CATIA for complex mechanical parts design and a CNC machine tool to manufacture parts. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 415 "Advanced Programming for Mechanical and Industrial Engineers" "Prerequisite: MECH 215. Class definitions. Designing classes and member functions. Constructors and destructors. Class libraries and their uses. Input and output. Data abstraction and encapsulation. Introduction to software engineering. Computer graphics and visualization. Numerical methods. Advanced mechanical and industrial engineering applications. This course includes a substantial project. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week."
MECH 421 "Mechanical Shaping of Metals and Plastics" "Prerequisite: MECH 221. Metal forming: extrusion, forging, rolling, drawing, pressing, compacting; shear line theory, sheet forming limits. Metal cutting, machinability, tooling. Plastics shaping: extrusion, moulding, vacuum forming. Consideration of the mechanical parameters critical for process control and computer applications. Interaction of materials characteristics with processing to define product properties: cold working, annealing, hot working, super plasticity, thermomechanical treatment. Energy conservation, safety, product quality, and liability. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 422 "Mechanical Behaviour of Polymer Composite Materials" "Prerequisite: ENGR 233, 244; MECH 221. General applications of polymer composite materials in aircraft, aerospace, automobile, marine, recreational, and chemical processing industries. Mechanics of a unidirectional lamina. Transformation of stress, strain, modulus, and compliance. Off-axis engineering constants, shear and normal coupling coefficients. In-plane and flexural stiffness and compliance with different laminates, including cross-ply, angle-ply, quasiisotropic, and general bidirectional laminates. Hygrothermal effects. Strength of laminates and failure criteria. Micromechanics. Lectures: three hours per week."
MECH 423 "Casting, Welding, Heat Treating, and Non-Destructive Testing" "Prerequisite: MECH 221. Comparative analysis of the various techniques of casting, welding, powder fabrication, finishing, and non-destructive testing. Consideration of the control parameters that are essential to define both automation and robot application. Materials behaviour which determines product micro-structure and properties. Technology and theory of solidification, normalizing, quenching, surface hardening, tempering, aging, and thermomechanical processing for steels, cast irons and Al, Cu, Ni and Ti alloys. Energy conservation, worker safety, quality control, and product liability. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 424 "MEMS  Design and Fabrication" "Prerequisite: MECH 311, 343. Introduction to microsystems and devices; mechanical properties of materials used in microsystems; microfabrication and post-processing techniques; sacrificial and structural layers; lithography, deposition and etching; introduction and design of different types of sensors and actuators; micromotors and other microdevices; mechanical design, finite element modelling; design and fabrication of free-standing structures; microbearings; special techniques: double-sided lithography, electrochemical milling, laser machining, LIGA, influence of IC fabrication methods on mechanical properties; application examples in biomedical, industrial, and space technology areas; integration, bonding and packaging of MEMS devices. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 425 "Manufacturing of Composites" "Prerequisite: MECH 311. Fibres and resins. Hand lay up. Autoclave curing. Compression molding. Filament winding. Resin transfer molding. Braiding. Injection molding. Cutting. Joining. Thermoset and thermoplastic composites. Polymer Nanocomposites. Process modelling and computer simulation. Non-destructive evaluation techniques. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 426 "Stress and Failure Analysis of Machinery" "Prerequisite: ENGR 233, 244; MECH 321. Analysis of stresses, strains and deformations in machine elements; non-symmetric bending of beams; shear centre for thin-walled beams; curved beams; torsion of non-circular shafts and tubes; thick wall cylinders; plates and shells; contact elements; stress concentrations; energy methods; failure modes, analysis and prevention; buckling, fracture, fatigue and creep. Lectures: three hours per week."
MECH 444 "Guided Vehicle Systems" "Prerequisite: MECH 375. Definition and classification of guided transportation systems. Track characterization: alignment, gage, profile, and cross-level irregularities. Wheel-rail interactions: rolling contact theories, creep forces. Modelling of guided vehicle components: wheel set, suspension, truck and car body configurations, suspension characteristics. Performance evaluation: stability hunting, ride quality. Introduction to advanced vehicles. Lectures: three hours per week."
MECH 447 "Fundamentals of Vehicle System Design" "Prerequisite: MECH 343. Mechanics and construction of wheels and tires: rolling resistance, tractive and braking forces, brake system design: components of mechanical, hydraulic and pneumatic brake systems, braking efficiency, antilock braking devices, performance characteristics of road vehicles: transmission design, driving condition diagrams, acceleration, speed and stopping distance, gradability, steering mechanisms: design and kinematics, suspension spring and shock absorbers: anti-roll and anti-pitch devices, chassis and body design considerations. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 448 "Vehicle Dynamics" "Prerequisite: MECH 447 previously or concurrently. Tire-terrain interactions; side-slip, cornering and aligning properties of tires; camber angle and camber torque; estimation of braking/tractive and cornering forces of tires; steady-state handling of road vehicles; steering response and directional stability; handling and directional response of vehicles with multiple steerable axles; handling of articulated vehicles; handling and directional response of tracked and wheeled off-road vehicles; directional response to simultaneous braking and steering. Lectures: three hours per week."
MECH 452 "Heat Transfer II" "Prerequisite: MECH 351, 352, 361. Heat exchangers. Condensation and boiling heat transfer. Principles of forced convection. Analysis of free convection from a vertical wall. Correlations for free convection in enclosed spaces. Mass transfer. Special topics of heat transfer. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 453 "Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Systems" "Prerequisite: MECH 352. Heating and cooling load calculation. Overview of heating and air conditioning systems. Review: Vapour compression refrigeration cycles, refrigerant properties, psychometrics. Performance characteristic of components: evaporators, condensers, compressors, throttling devices (expansion valves, capillary tubes). System performance characteristics: calculation of system operating conditions based on the capacities of its components and outdoor and indoor conditions. Controls: operational, capacity. Computer-aided design methods. Defrosting. Estimation of energy consumption for heating with heat pumps. Fundamentals of refrigerant piping, water piping, and air distribution systems. Experimental methods for system development. Lectures: three hours per week."
MECH 454 "Vehicular Internal Combustion Engines" "Prerequisite: MECH 351, 361. Mechanical design of vehicular engines for different applications. Gas exchange and combustion engine processes. Combustion chambers design. Fuels for vehicular engines. Fuel supply, ignition and control systems. Cooling and lubrication of engines. Emissions formation and control. Engines operational characteristics  matching with vehicles. Enhancement of engine performance. Engine testing. Environmental impact of vehicular engines on global pollution. Recent developments in energy efficient and clean engines. Design or calculation project of vehicular engine. Lectures: three hours per week."
MECH 460 "Finite Element Analysis" "Prerequisite: ENGR 244, 391. Formulation and application of the finite element method to modelling of engineering problems, including stress analysis, vibrations, and heat transfer. Examples illustrating the direct approach, as well as variational and weighted residual methods. Elements and interpolation functions. Meshing effect. Error analysis. One- and two-dimensional boundary value problems. Development of simple programs and direct experience with general purpose packages currently used in industry for design problems. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: three hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 461 "Gas Dynamics" "Prerequisite: MECH 361. Review of one-dimensional compressible flow. Normal and oblique shock waves; Prandtl-Meyer flow; combined effects in one-dimensional flow; non-ideal gas effects; multi-dimensional flow; linearized flow; method of characteristics. Selected experiments in supersonic flow, convergent-divergent nozzles, hydraulic analog and Fanno tube. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 462 "Wind Turbine Engineering" "Prerequisite: MECH 343, 361; MECH344, 371 previously or concurrently. This course is designed to cover the theoretical and practical areas pertinent to the operation of wind turbines. Energy in the wind. Aerodynamic drag and lift of turbine blades. Horizontal axis and vertical axis wind turbine designs. Generators. Control systems. Mechanical load analysis: blade, tower, generator and gearbox. Blade and tower design. Turbine braking. Economical, environmental and safety aspects."
MECH 463 "Fluid Power Control" "Prerequisite: ENGR 361; ELEC 372 or MECH 371. Introduction to fluid power; pneumatic devices; fluidic devices; hydraulic system components; hydraulic and electro-hydraulic systems; dynamic performance of fluid power systems; fluid logic. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 471 "Microcontrollers for Mechatronics" "Prerequisite: ENGR 311; MECH 368. Introduction to the concepts and practices of microcontrollers and their application for the control of electromechanical devices and systems. Study of the internal architecture of microcontrollers; programming in assembly language for specific microcontroller functions and controller algorithms; timing of the microcontroller and interfacing with peripheral devices. Students undertake hands-on project work by controlling the position or speed of a DC motor with a feed-back sensor. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 472 "Mechatronics and Automation" "Prerequisite: MECH 215; MECH 371 previously or concurrently. Design and analysis of mechatronic and automation systems. Selection and integration of actuators, sensors, hardware, and software. Computer vision. Programming and software design for mechatronic systems. Modelling and simulation. Design of logic control systems. Finite state machine methods. Feedback control and trajectory generation. Safety logic systems. Case studies including automation systems, mobile robots, and unmanned vehicle systems. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 473 "Control System Design" "Prerequisite: ELEC 372 or MECH 371. Analog and digital controller designs. Analog controllers: lead/lag compensators, pole placement, model matching, two-parameter configuration, plant input/output feedback configuration. Digital controllers: difference equations, Z-transform, stability in the Z-domain, digital implementation of analog controllers, equivalent digital plant method, alias signals, selection of sampling time. Introduction to analog/digital state-space: controllability, observability, state feedback, state estimator. PI and PID controllers. Simulink assignments and project. Hardware laboratory project: analog and digital controller design for motor with inertial plus generator load. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 474 "" "Prerequisite: ELEC 372 or MECH 371. Introduction to mechatronics; basic elements of mechatronic systems. Measurement systems: including principles of measurement systems; sensors and transducers; signal conditioning processes and circuits; filters and data acquisition. Actuation systems: mechanical actuation systems and electrical actuation systems. Controllers: control modes; PID controller; performance measures; introduction to digital controllers and robust control. Modelling and analysis of mechatronic systems; performance measures; frequency response; transient response analysis; stability analysis. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: three hours per week, alternate weeks."
MECH 476 "" "Prerequisite: MECH 313; AERO 390 or MECH 390 previously or concurrently. Generative design is a form-finding process that can mimic natures evolutionary approach to design. It can start with design goals and then explore innumerable possible permutations of a solution to find the best option. This course provides fundamental information on generative design and manufacturing in engineering. The core techniques from mathematics to artificial intelligence that are commonly used in the creative industry are discussed. The formal paradigms and algorithms used for generation as well as cloud computing are also covered. Lectures: three hours per week."
MECH 490 "Capstone Mechanical Engineering Design Project" "Prerequisite: 75 credits in the program; ENCS 282; ENGR 301; MECH 344, 390. A supervised design, simulation or experimental capstone design project including a preliminary project proposal with complete project plan and a technical report at the end of the fall term; a final report by the group and presentation at the end of the winter term. Lectures: one hour per week, one term. Equivalent laboratory time: three hours per week, two terms."
MECH 498 "Topics in Mechanical Engineering" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department Chair. This course may be offered in a given year upon the authorization of the Mechanical, Industrial and Aerospace Engineering Department. The course content may vary from offering to offering and will be chosen to complement the elective courses available in a given option or options. Lectures: three hours per week."
ENGL 206 "Fundamentals of Written English  Stage I" "Prerequisite: ESL 204 or placement test. This course provides training in grammar and idiomatic usage, through practice with articles and plurals, verb forms and tenses, prepositions and verb-preposition combinations, sentence structure, and punctuation, as well as reading comprehension and vocabulary development through practice in paraphrasing short texts."
ENGL 207 "Fundamentals of Written English  Stage II" "Prerequisite: ENGL 206 or placement test. This course continues the work begun in ENGL 206 by providing additional training and practice in grammar and idiomatic usage, sentence structure and punctuation, as well as vocabulary development and reading comprehension through practice in paraphrasing and summarizing."
ENGL 208 "Introduction to English Composition and Literary Analysis" "Prerequisite: Placement test. This course is intended for students who wish to improve their writing skills through written analysis of fiction, drama, and literary essays."
ENGL 210 "Introduction to Essay Writing" "Prerequisite: ENGL 207 or placement test. The course provides further practice in English composition by focusing on diction, sentence structure, punctuation, paragraph development, and essay writing."
ENGL 212 "English Composition  Stage I" "Prerequisite: ENGL 210 or placement test. This course is intended to help students produce clear, concise, logically organized essays and reports. Emphasis is placed on purpose, organization, and development through analysis and integration of information from a variety of sources."
ENGL 213 "English Composition  Stage II " "Prerequisite: ENGL 212 or placement test. This course develops further the writing skills acquired in ENGL 212 by familiarizing students with the processes and techniques necessary for the preparation of research papers and academic reports. Emphasis is placed on summarizing and paraphrasing, critiquing ideas and information, and synthesizing, citing, and documenting multiple sources. A library orientation is a required part of this course."
ENGL 214 "Grammar, Usage, and Style" "Prerequisite: ENGL 212. This course offers a practical analysis of the conventions governing contemporary English grammar and usage, punctuation, sentence structure, and syntax. It focuses on means for identifying and analyzing stylistic effectiveness and persuasive power in diverse professional situations."
ENGL 215 "Principles and Practice of Editing" "Prerequisite: ENGL 214 previously or concurrently. This course includes basic copy editing and techniques for eliminating errors in style, mechanics, and facts, and substantive editing for identifying structural problems and reorganizing, reworking, and rewriting documents."
ENGL 216 "Writing for Diverse Audiences" "Prerequisite: ENGL 213 previously or concurrently. This course examines the ways that information is presented to different audiences through writing and the interaction of texts and images. Assignments include analysis of informational and persuasive strategies in model discourses for form, content, style, and design, and the application of such techniques to developing and producing documents."
ENGL 224 "The Creative Process" "This course introduces students to some options for developing their own process of literary creation, from the development of an idea through to the writing and editing of works of prose fiction, poetry, and/or drama. Coursework may include writing assignments, in-class exercises, readings, group presentations, and discussions. This course is open to all students."
ENGL 225 "Introductory Creative Writing: Poetry" "This is an introductory workshop in the writing of poetry. The first half of the course is an introduction to poetic forms and techniques. Required readings of poetry and critical essays, and exercises and assignments based on these readings, develop a common critical language and an understanding of poetry from a writers point of view. This knowledge is applied during the second half of the course, during which the class is conducted as a writing workshop. Students submit their original work for class discussion and evaluation."
ENGL 226 "Introductory Creative Writing: Prose Fiction" "This is an introductory workshop in the writing of prose fiction. The first half of the course is an introduction to prose forms and techniques. Required readings of fiction and critical essays, and exercises and assignments based on these readings, develop a common critical language and an understanding of fiction from a writers point of view. This knowledge is applied during the second half of the course, during which the class is conducted as a writing workshop. Students submit their original work for class discussion and evaluation."
ENGL 227 "Introductory Creative Writing: Playwriting" "This is an introductory workshop in the writing of plays. The first half of the course is an introduction to dramatic forms and techniques. Required readings of drama and critical essays, and exercises and assignments based on these readings, develop a common critical language and an understanding of drama from a writers point of view. This knowledge is applied during the second half of the course, during which the class is conducted as a writing workshop. Students submit their original work for class discussion and evaluation."
ENGL 231 "Medieval Literature in Translation" "This course studies influential texts in the Western tradition written between 400 and 1500, with emphasis on the innovations in the various genres of narrative (epic, saga, romance, tale) and erotic and ethical discourse. Texts by such writers as Marie de France, Chrtien de Troyes, Dante, and Petrarch, may be studied, as well as anonymous works such as Icelandic sagas and "
ENGL 233 "Critical Reading" "This course is an introduction to the practice of close reading of selections chosen from poetry, fiction, drama, and non-literary prose with the aim of developing the skills necessary to respond to written texts."
ENGL 234 "Poetry" "Through a detailed examination of the various forms of poetry, this course is designed to familiarize students with the vocabulary and critical and technical concepts of the genre."
ENGL 235 "Short Fiction" "Through a detailed examination of the various forms of short fiction and the novella, this course is designed to familiarize students with the vocabulary, critical concepts, and history of the genre."
ENGL 237 "Tragedy" "This course is an introduction to the nature and varieties of tragic forms and sensibilities in Western literature. The course includes writers from antiquity to the present such as Sophocles, Euripides, Shakespeare, Behn, Racine, Hardy, Ibsen, Lorca, and Chopin."
ENGL 238 "Comedy" "This course is an introduction to the nature and varieties of comic forms and sensibilities in Western literature. The course includes writers from antiquity to the present such as Aristophanes, Cervantes, Jonson, Molire, Sterne, Gogol, Wilde, Leacock, and Amis."
ENGL 240 "Drama" "This course is an introduction to dramatic literature, principally in the Western tradition, and is designed to familiarize students with a selection of major works in this genre. Plays include ancient Greek dramas and works written for the stage by such writers as Aeschylus, Sophocles, Aristophanes, Shakespeare, Caldern, Webster, Racine, Molire, Bchner, Chekhov, Ibsen, Beckett, Handke, Stoppard, and Soyinka."
ENGL 241 "The Novel" "This course is an introduction to the varieties of novelistic forms in world literature. It familiarizes students with critical approaches to the novel and the history of the novel as a literary genre."
ENGL 243 "Satire" "This course is an introduction to the nature, varieties, and functions of satire, including writers from antiquity to the present, such as Juvenal, Horace, Erasmus, Swift, Voltaire, Byron, Butler, Orwell, Waugh, Spark, Richler, Vonnegut, and Atwood."
ENGL 244 "Quebec/Montreal Writing in English" "This course surveys the literature of Quebec written in English, with emphasis on Montreal writing. It includes such writers as"
ENGL 246 "Science Fiction" "This introductory course explores the development of science fiction from Mary Shelley to H.G. Wells to the present day. Along with works by such authors as Huxley, Clarke, Dick, Delany, Le Guin, Atwood, or Gibson, translated works by such authors as Verne, Zamyatin, and Lem may be studied."
ENGL 249 "Childrens Literature" "As an introductory survey of childrens literature, this course includes works written primarily for adults but traditionally also read by children, works specifically written for children, as well as fairy tales and other versions of folklore and myth written or adapted for children."
ENGL 250 "Forms of Popular Writing" "The topic of this course varies from year to year. It investigates such forms as spy novel, detective fiction, mystery, romance, travel writing, horror, and erotica in the context of the conventions, history, and popular appeal of the genre under discussion."
ENGL 251 "The Graphic Novel " "This course examines both literary and popular antecedents to the graphic novel, the variety of its forms, and its status in contemporary literature. Students are introduced to critical approaches that can take account of both verbal and visual aspects of the graphic novel."
ENGL 255 "Video Games and/as Literature" "This course is an introduction to the study of the formal, aesthetic and cultural aspects of video games. It places particular emphasis on the relationship of digital games to the history of literary form, introducing students to critical approaches that address the importance of narrative, the materiality of digital text, and the role of interpretive communities."
ENGL 260 "Introduction to Literary Study" "This course introduces students to the practice of literary criticism at the university level through reading and writing about a variety of literary texts while developing the tools to analyze them in a close and critical fashion. This entails attention to the fundamentals and varieties of literary criticism  genre, rhetorical and figurative language, and narrative structure  as well as some attention to the role of theory in literary study."
ENGL 261 "British Literature to 1660" "Starting with selected Old English texts in translation, the course examines the literary production of the medieval period and the 15th to 17th centuries in Britain. Works are studied in their social and historical contexts and, where possible, in relation to the other arts. The course may discuss "
ENGL 262 "British Literature from 1660 to 1900" "Prerequisite: ENGL 261 recommended. This course surveys literature written in Britain from the period following the Civil War and Commonwealth to the end of the Victorian era, periods traditionally labelled Neo-Classic, Romantic, and Victorian. The course considers such issues and forms as epic, mock-epic, satire, the development of the novel, the comedy of manners, the rise of the professional writer, the romantic lyric, the increasing activity of women writers, the origins of modernism, and the interrelations among the periods."
ENGL 298 "Selected Topics in English" ""
ENGL 299 "Selected Topics in English" ""
ENGL 302 "History of the English Language" "This course examines changes in the English language from the Anglo-Saxon era to the present, considering such matters as pronunciation, inflections, syntax, vocabulary, and social distribution."
ENGL 303 "Reading Women Writing" "This course offers an historical and theoretical perspective on writings by women from different periods, cultural contexts, and expressive forms. A close reading of selected novels, short stories, plays, and of polemical, poetic, and autobiographical works raises such issues as class, race, and gender; sexuality and creativity; national, collective, and individual identity; literary and political strategies of resistance; the use, transformation and subversion of literary forms; the popular and critical reception of individual works."
ENGL 304 "Chaucer" "This course studies major texts of Geoffrey Chaucer with emphasis on "
ENGL 305 "Studies in Medieval English Literature" "This course examines selected subjects in the history of Old English and Middle English literature. Specific topics and prerequisites for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ENGL 306 "Tolkiens Old English" "This course studies the fantasy novels of J.R.R. Tolkien alongside the works of Old English literature that inspired him, considering the grammar of Old English and such selections as the Exeter Riddles, The Battle of Maldon, The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, and Beowulf in juxtaposition with Tolkiens novels."
ENGL 307 "The Viking Age in Poetry and Prose" "This course examines both Old English accounts of Viking incursions into England and Scandinavian accounts of Swedish and Danish migration, such as the Poetic Edda, skaldic poetry, and the Sagas, as well as the later-medieval literature memorializing the period, such as Anglo-Norman and Middle English romances, legal texts, chronicles, and saints lives."
ENGL 308 "Mysteries, Miracles, and Medieval Drama" "This course studies drama in the period between the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the rise of the commercial theatre in the 16th century, focusing particularly on late-medieval England. This course includes such works as the Wakefield (or Towneley) mystery plays, the N-town plays, the York, Chester and Coventry Cycles, and morality plays such as "
ENGL 310 "16th-Century Prose and Poetry" "This course investigates aspects of the development of non-dramatic literature from the late-15th century to the 1590s, through an examination of representative poems and prose in their historical and cultural contexts. Works are selected from writers such as Skelton, Wyatt, Nashe, Spenser, Sidney, and Shakespeare."
ENGL 311 "17th-Century Prose and Poetry" "This course investigates aspects of the development of prose and lyric poetry from the 1590s through the Civil War and Commonwealth periods, including such issues as genre, form, the representation of subjectivity and gender, the function of patronage, and the shift to a print culture. Works are selected from writers such as Mary Sidney, Jonson, Lanyer, Donne, Browne, Herbert, Wroth, and Marvell."
ENGL 316 "Spenser" "This course examines Spensers works, especially "
ENGL 317 "Studies in English Renaissance Literature" "This course examines selected subjects in the history of English Renaissance literature. Specific topics and prerequisites for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ENGL 318 "English Renaissance Drama" "This course studies plays written in the period from the start of the English commercial theatre in 1576 until its closing in 1642, in terms of the development of dramatic forms, court and popular culture, and social history. The course includes such writers as Kyd, Marlowe, Middleton, Jonson, Cary, Webster, and Ford."
ENGL 319 "Milton" "This course examines "
ENGL 320 "Shakespeare" "This course examines a range of Shakespearean texts in relation to such matters as dramatic and theatrical conventions, social history, poetic language, high and popular culture, critical history, and influence."
ENGL 321 "Restoration and Early 18th-Century Literature " "This course studies British literature from 1660, when the monarchy was returned to power, to 1730, when the court no longer dominated British literary culture. The course examines the wide range of genres introduced or transformed by the periods restless literary imagination, including the novel, satire, the letter, and the essay. It situates these developments in the context of changing ideas of status, gender, sexuality, science, politics, and economics."
ENGL 322 "Restoration and 18th-Century Drama" "This course examines the changing role of theatre in English culture after the re-opening of the theatres in 1660 to the middle years of the 18th century: from aristocratic heroism and libertine scandals to increasingly middle-class pleasures. It focuses on the transformation of dramatic conventions in such forms as the comedy of manners and sentimental tragedy and familiarizes students with the history of performance in the period, including the introduction of actresses and the codification of new acting styles."
ENGL 323 "The Literature of Sensibility " "This course examines the structure and nature of feeling in British literature of the mid- and late-18th century along with some consideration of concurrent developments in philosophy, historical and critical writing, and biography. It explores the contributions of concepts of sensibility and sympathy to aesthetic innovations such as realism, pornography, the gothic, and the sublime, and political developments such as feminism, abolitionism, and an emergent discourse of human rights."
ENGL 324 "The 18th- and 19th-Century Novel" "This course surveys developments in the British novel from its origins in documentary realism, satire, and romance, including the gothic, to the emergence of the novel as a dominant literary genre. The course includes works by such writers as Defoe, Fielding, Sterne, Radcliffe, Burney, Edgeworth, Austen, Dickens, the Bronts, Eliot, and Hardy."
ENGL 326 "Studies in 18th-Century British Literature" "This course examines selected subjects in the history of 18th-century British literature. Specific topics and prerequisites for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ENGL 327 "Restoration and 18th-Century Satire " "This course examines the development of satirical poetry, prose, and drama in the Restoration and 18th century. It explores formal issues such as satires debts and contributions to pastoral, georgic, epic, comedy and the novel alongside such social, political, and intellectual concerns as the battle of the ancients and the moderns, libel, sedition, and copyright law, the rise of party politics, and changing gender roles. Writers may include Marvell, Rochester, Dryden, Swift, Pope, Manley, Gay, Fielding, and Sterne."
ENGL 328 "The Rise of the Novel " "This course examines the emergence and evolution of the novel and novel criticism from their beginnings in the 1680s until the end of the 18th century. It explores the reciprocal pressures of romance and realism in the formation of the novel in order to consider the ethical and aesthetic issues raised by this popular genre as well as the influences of other genres such as journalism, letters, diaries, and travel writing."
ENGL 329 "Literature of the Romantic Period" "This course examines the prose and poetry of the Romantic period (ca. 1790 to 1830s) in relation to such topics as the French Revolution, the Napoleonic wars, domestic politics, literary conventions, and the idea of the poet. Among the poets to be considered are Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron, Shelley, and Keats. Some attention may be given to such writers as Dorothy Wordsworth, De Quincey, Hazlitt, the Lambs, Austen, Scott, Mary Shelley, and Peacock."
ENGL 331 "18th- and 19th-Century Writing by Women" "This course examines the poetry, prose, and drama of such writers as Astell, Manley, Finch, Haywood, Burney, Radcliffe, Edgeworth, Austen, Wollstonecraft, Shelley, the Bronts, and Eliot in such contexts as the gendering of authorship, the making of literary history, and the uses and transformations of literary conventions."
ENGL 332 "Studies in 19th-Century British Literature " "This course examines selected subjects in the history of 19th-century British literature. Specific topics and prerequisites for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ENGL 333 "Studies in 19th-Century British Poetry " "This course examines selected subjects in the history of 19th-century poetry in Britain. Specific topics and prerequisites for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ENGL 334 "Studies in 19th-Century British Prose " "This course examines selected subjects in the history of 19th-century British prose literature, including possibly non-fiction and fiction. Specific topics and prerequisites for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ENGL 335 "Literature of the Victorian Period" "This course studies the poetry, fiction and other prose writings of such writers as Carlyle, Tennyson, the Brownings, the Bronts, Dickens, George Eliot, Newman, Ruskin, and Arnold. These works are examined in relation to such issues as class divisions, gender roles, the erosion of the authority of institutional religion, the increasing prestige of scientific explanation, the growth of British imperial power."
ENGL 336 "Late Victorian and Edwardian Writing" "This course investigates such matters as late Victorian art and aesthetic theory, the rise of modernism, literary experimentation, and the interrogation of traditional values. Works are selected from such writers as Butler, Pater, Wilde, James, the Rossettis, Swinburne, Morris, Meredith, Schreiner, Hardy, Conrad, and Forster."
ENGL 338 "Modern British Literature" "This course examines British literature from the death of Queen Victoria in 1902 to the end of World War II in 1945, with reference to such topics as the world wars; the modernist coteries of Imagism, Vorticism, and Bloomsbury; the womens suffrage movement; the decline of the empire and rise of militant Leftist and Right-wing parties; and nationalist literary revivalism in Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. This course includes diverse works in a range of genres from this time period."
ENGL 339 "British Literature Since 1945" "This course examines British literature since World War II with reference to such topics as the disintegration of the British Empire and the spread of its diaspora, the implementation of the Welfare State, entry into the European Community, Ulster sectarianism, mobilizations for gender equality and racial equity, youth culture from jazz and skiffle to punk and dub, the emergence of alternative theatre, the erosion of the State broadcasting monopoly and of State censorship, Thatcherism and Brexit. This course includes diverse works in a range of genres from recent decades."
ENGL 340 "Modernism" "The congeries of experimental movements collectively identified as Modernism, flourishing from prior to World War I until World War II, renegotiated artistic conventions, revived neglected traditions, and turned attention to the primary materials of art (sound, colour, language). In painting emerged a tendency to abstraction, in music a tendency to atonality, and in literature to non-mimetic forms. Experiments abounded in disjunctive, elliptical, impressionistic, allusive, and mythopoeic styles. Avant-garde artists organized into numerous schools, including the Imagists, Surrealists, Dadaists, Constructivists, Futurists, and Vorticists. The literature, often produced by expatriates, was cosmopolitan, elitist, and provocative. Much of the most important work, appropriately enough in an era of female enfranchisement, was written by women. It was also the Jazz Age, the nexus of which was the Harlem Renaissance. While the course focuses on the lively cross-fertilization of British and American writing, the international scope of Modernism is also emphasized, as well as its diversity (e.g. in ballet, cinema, music, and painting)."
ENGL 341 "Modern Fiction" "This course examines a developing international literary culture from the early-20th century to the post-war period. Works are selected from such writers as Mann, Kafka, Proust, Stein, Camus, Borges, Nabokov, and Pynchon."
ENGL 342 "Creative Writing: Prose Fiction" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Creative Writing program and ENGL 226 or permission of the Department. Through intensive analysis and discussion of submitted work and directed reading in modern fiction, this workshop extends the development of students narrative skills and their understanding of fictional forms."
ENGL 343 "Modern European Literature" "This course surveys late-19th- and 20th-century plays, poems, and novels in translation, chosen from such writers as Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Ibsen, Chekhov, Gide, Sartre, Colette, Akhmatova, Svevo, Mann, Musil, Bll, and Calvino."
ENGL 344 "Creative Writing: Playwriting " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Creative Writing program and ENGL 227 or permission of the Department. Through reading of contemporary playwrights and intensive discussion and analysis of submitted work, this workshop helps students refine their skills in the process of completing a fully formed one-act play."
ENGL 345 "Modern Drama" "This course surveys the main currents of 20th-century drama in a study of such writers as Ibsen, Chekhov, Strindberg, Lorca, Lady Gregory, Ionesco, Barnes, Beckett, Albee, Pinter, Orton, Stoppard, and Handke."
ENGL 347 "Creative Non-Fiction Writing" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Creative Writing program and ENGL 225 or 226 or 227, or permission of the Department. This course is a workshop in the writing of creative non-fiction (journal, personal essay, travel, biography and autobiography) including the reading of selected texts and discussion and criticism of students work."
ENGL 348 "Creative Writing: Poetry" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Creative Writing program and ENGL 225 or permission of the Department. Through intensive analysis and discussion of students work, experimentation with a variety of forms, and selected reading, this workshop helps students extend their grasp of poetics and their competence in the writing of poetry."
ENGL 349 "Modern Poetry in English" "This course studies the theory and practice of poets writing in English during the 20th century. Examples are chosen from such writers as Yeats, Pound, Eliot, Crane, Stein, Auden, Stevens, Moore, Bishop, and Merrill, as well as from some more recent poets."
ENGL 351 "20th-Century Writing by Women" "Through fiction, personal writings, poetry, and drama, this course examines gender and its discontents in turn-of-the-century and mid-century writing, in writing of the modernist period, and in writing of the politically oriented second wave of feminism of the 1960s and 1970s. Its concerns include the developing representation of race, class, and sexual orientation. Works are selected from such writers as Woolf, Hurston, Nin, Plath, Rich, Rule, Walker, Morrison, Cixous, Pollock, Gordimer, and El Saadawi."
ENGL 352 "Contemporary Writing by Women" "This course deals with fiction, personal writings, poetry, and drama from the late 1970s to the present. Its concerns may include the challenges and possibilities of postmodernism; experiments in writing the life, writing the body, writing between genres, between cultures; collaborative writing; the uses and transformations of traditional and popular forms of writing. Works are selected from such writers as Morrison, Desai, Munro, Marlatt, Scott, Maracle, Aidoo, Winterson, Gallant, Anzaldua, and Rendell."
ENGL 353 "Contemporary Irish Literature " "This course examines a selection of Irish literary texts reflecting the social, economic, political, and cultural transformations in both the North and the South, written since 1960 by writers such as Brian Friel, Seamus Heaney, Deirdre Madden, Eavan Boland, Dermot Bolger, Patrick McCabe, John McGahern, and Hugo Hamilton."
ENGL 354 "Studies in Contemporary Literature" "This course examines selected subjects in literature of recent decades."
ENGL 355 "Joyce" "This course will examine Joyces "
ENGL 356 "The Irish Short Story Tradition " "This course traces the development of the Irish short story from its roots in the Gaelic story-telling tradition and its origins as a literary form in the 19th century, in stories by such writers as James Joyce, Frank OConnor, Elizabeth Bowen, Sean OFaolain, Mary Lavin, Edna OBrien, William Trevor, Ellis Ni Dhuibhne, and Bernard MacLaverty. Students discuss the narrative strategies used to explore various versions of Irish identity."
ENGL 357 "The Irish Literary Revival " "This course traces the origins and nature of the extraordinary literary renaissance that occurred in Ireland from the 1880s to the 1920s. It examines issues such as the rise of Irish cultural nationalism and the concomitant turn to Irelands past, both mythic and historic, as well as the continuing influence of the Catholic Church and the British state. Writers studied include W.B. Yeats, Lady Gregory, J.M. Synge, James Joyce, and Sean OCasey."
ENGL 358 "Emigrants and Immigrants: Writing the Irish Diaspora " "This course examines various forms of literary expression  novels, stories, poems, and life-writing (memoirs, autobiographies, letters)  from Ireland and the Irish Diaspora that address the experience of emigration, settlement, and integration of Irish migrants in various countries around the world. Issues explored include concepts of diasporic and transnational identities; the negotiation of forms of self-understanding and self-transformation in the context of hybridity, fluidity, and multiplicity; and the roles of landscape, memory, and cultural production as determining factors in the competing hegemonies of homeland and diaspora. A selection of texts by writers from Ireland (Brian Friel, Joseph OConnor, Eavan Boland), Canada (DArcy McGee, Brian Moore, Jane Urquhart), America (William Kennedy, Alice McDermott, Maeve Brennan), England (Patrick MacGill, Elizabeth Bowen, William Trevor) and Australia (Thomas Keneally, Vincent Buckley) is explored. A selection of letters, diaries, and personal reflections by Irish immigrants is also studied."
ENGL 359 "Studies in Irish Literature" "This course examines selected subjects in the history of Irish literature. Specific topics and prerequisites for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ENGL 360 "American Literature" "A survey of American literature from the colonial period into the 20th century. Readings are drawn from such writers as Bradstreet, Emerson, Thoreau, Poe, Hawthorne, Melville, Whitman, Dickinson, Twain, James, Douglass, Chopin, Fitzgerald, and Faulkner."
ENGL 361 "American Literature before 1800 " "This course concentrates on American Colonial literature from the early Puritan settlements to the aftermath of the Revolution, drawing on the works of such writers as Bradford, Rowlandson, Taylor, Franklin, Paine, and Jefferson."
ENGL 362 "American Literature 1800-1865 " "This course focuses on American writing from shortly after the Revolution to after the Civil War, tracing the development of an American literary tradition through the works of such authors as Irving, Emerson, Hawthorne, Melville, Stowe, Douglass, Whitman, and Dickinson."
ENGL 363 "American Literature 1865-1914 " "This course traces American literature from the conclusion of the Civil War until World War I, examining such authors as Twain, James, Harte, Jewett, Crane, DuBois, and Wharton."
ENGL 364 "American Literature from 1914 to Mid-20th Century " "This course traces American realism, modernism, and regionalism from World War I until the mid-20th century, emphasizing such writers as Cather, Frost, Stevens, Williams, Moore, Toomer, Faulkner, Fitzgerald, Hemingway, Welty, and Ellison."
ENGL 365 "American Literature from Mid-20th Century to the Present " "This course considers developments in American literature since World War II through the work of such writers as Plath, Bishop, Baldwin, OConnor, Bellow, Nabokov, Pynchon, Updike, Oates, Morrison, Barthelme, and Walker."
ENGL 366 "The American Novel " "This course concentrates on the American novel from its early emergence, through its experimental and sentimental periods, to its present range of forms, examining the works of such writers as Brockden Brown, Cooper, Stowe, James, Stein, Faulkner, Wright, Morrison, Updike, and Sorrentino."
ENGL 367 "American Poetry" "This course considers the theory and practice of American poetry from the 19th century to the present through the work of such writers as Whitman, Dickinson, Frost, H.D., Pound, Stevens, Williams, Olson, Ginsberg, Waldman, Bishop, and Ashbery."
ENGL 368 "African-American Literature to 1900" "This course traces the emergence of African-American literature, from early poetry and slave narratives to later autobiographies and novels, examining such writers as Wheatley, Turner, Douglass, Jacobs, Harper, Chesnutt, Washington, and DuBois."
ENGL 369 "African-American Literature 1900 to Present " "This course considers African-American literature from the renewal of southern segregation laws, through the Harlem Renaissance, the Civil Rights Movement, and contemporary writing, tracing the works of such writers as Toomer, Hurston, Hughes, Wright, Ellison, Giovanni, Reed, Walker, Dove, and Morrison."
ENGL 370 "Canadian Literature" "This course examines the development of Canadian literature from its beginnings to the present day through a series of representative works of prose and poetry, written in or translated into English."
ENGL 373 "19th-Century Canadian Literature" "This course studies the literature written in Canada in a variety of genres as the country evolved from colony to nation. It explores such topics as the relations among discourse, nation building, gender, and genre."
ENGL 374 "Canadian Fiction to 1950" "This course studies the themes and technical strategies of Canadian fiction from the 1890s to the mid-20th century by such authors as Roberts, Montgomery, Leacock, Callaghan, Ross, MacLennan, Mitchell, and Smart."
ENGL 376 "Postwar Canadian Fiction" "This course studies Canadian fiction from 1950 through the mid-1960s as it incorporates the lyrical and the documentary, the universal and the regional, the traditional and the experimental. Authors may include Roy, Wilson, Buckler, MacLennan, Watson, Wiseman, Cohen, and Richler."
ENGL 377 "Contemporary Canadian Fiction" "This course studies the continuity and development of Canadian fiction from the mid-1960s to the present. Authors may include Laurence, Davies, Carrier, Wiebe, Atwood, Munro, Kogawa, Shields, Gallant, and Ondaatje."
ENGL 378 "Modern Canadian Poetry" "This course examines the changes in Canadian poetry from the beginning of the 20th century to the mid-1960s by such authors as Pratt, Klein, Scott, Livesay, Birney, Page, Layton, Purdy, and Avison."
ENGL 379 "Contemporary Canadian Poetry" "This course examines the development of Canadian poetry from the mid-1960s to the present by such authors as Atwood, Ondaatje, Nichol, MacEwan, Kroetsch, Webb, Kogawa, Dewdney, and Brand."
ENGL 380 "First Nations/North American Native Literature" "This course studies the native literature of Canada and/or the United States, from oral performance traditions, transcriptions and translations into English, and writing in English by such authors as Johnston, Campbell, King, Highway, Momaday, Erdrich, Allen, and Silko."
ENGL 381 "Literature of Ethnic America " "This course examines questions of ethnicity in American literature, challenging what Crevecoeur described in the 18th century as the melting pot from the perspective of such writers as Cahan, (Henry and Philip) Roth, Baldwin, Cisneros, Kingston, Silko, Tan, and Hosseini."
ENGL 382 "Postcolonial Literature" "This course offers a historical and theoretical introduction to literature in English from formerly colonized regions. The course examines a selection of texts  from regions such as Africa, South Asia, and the Caribbean  that address such issues as the spread of English through British colonial contact and the development of writing in English both during and after the colonial period."
ENGL 383 "African Literature" "This course considers how literature in English by writers from sub-Saharan Africa is embedded in the history and experience of colonization and decolonization. The course includes such authors as Achebe, Soyinka, Saro-Wiwa, Emecheta, Okri, Armah, Aidoo, Farah, Dangarembga, Coetzee, and Gordimer. The focus is on the political and aesthetic issues raised by African writing in English."
ENGL 385 "Studies in Postcolonial Literature " "This course examines selected subjects in the field of postcolonial literature. Specific topics and prerequisites for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
ENGL 386 "Caribbean Literature" "This course explores how Caribbean literature in English from nations such as Barbados, Trinidad, Antigua, Jamaica, Grenada, St. Lucia, and Guyana is implicated in the history of slavery, colonialism, and postcolonialism. The work of such authors as Bennett, Walcott, Brathwaite, Goodison, James, Selvon, Lamming, Naipaul, Brodber, Cliff, and Kincaid is examined in relation to the writers socio-cultural contexts and to the political and aesthetic issues raised by their texts."
ENGL 387 "South Asian Literature" "This course studies literature from South Asia written in English by authors from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka, such as Rushdie, Anand, Das, Narayan, Ghosh, Desai, Chaudhuri, Markandaya, Sahgal, Selvadurai, Sidhwa, Rao, and Mistry. The focus is on the significance of precolonial, colonial, and postcolonial socio-cultural concerns as expressed in a variety of literary genres. Attention is given to English as a tool of colonization as well as a means for critiquing cultural hegemony."
ENGL 388 "Literature from Australia and New Zealand" "This course examines literature in English from Australia and New Zealand by such writers as White, Malouf, Jolley, Carey, Stead, Mudrooroo, Stow, Johnson, Frame, Hulma, Wedde, and Kenneally. Central to the course is a discussion of the impact of colonialism, and the ongoing relationship between settler and aboriginal communities as it inflects a variety of literary genres. Literature from the Pacific islands may also be considered."
ENGL 389 "" "This course surveys and contrasts major theories of criticism, with attention to methodologies and historical contexts. Texts are chosen from such representative theorists as Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, Lessing, Bakhtin, and in English Sidney, Dryden, Johnson, Coleridge, Arnold, Eliot, Woolf, Empson, Burke, and Frye."
ENGL 390 "Studies in Rhetoric" "This course offers an inquiry into the nature and function of rhetoric, the art of convincing others, through an examination of such influential classical writers as Aristotle, Cicero, and Quintilian, as well as the place of rhetoric in contemporary critical discourse. This course offers, through written exercises, practical experience in the development of rhetorical techniques."
ENGL 391 "" "This course compares the modes of description, investigation, and analysis in science and literature as reflections of the division of modern knowledge into the arts and sciences. How have scientific discoveries enriched or impoverished literature or critical thinking? How have literary texts represented science and the scientist? In what ways has scientific investigation been informed by literature? How does the comparison with science make it possible to explore and question the methodologies that have been developed from the study of literature? The course may focus on such topics as the development of the microscope, the telescope, evolutionary theory and neuroscience."
ENGL 392 "" "This course examines selected subjects in criticism and literary theory."
ENGL 393 "Gender and Sexuality in Literary Studies" "This course examines the development of the terms gender and sexuality as categories of historical analysis and literary interpretation by reading feminist and queer theories of gender and sexuality such as those of Rubin, Butler, Sedgwick, and Foucault alongside a range of historical and contemporary literary texts."
ENGL 394 "Contemporary Critical Theory" "This course introduces students to various interpretive strategies in contemporary critical theory, through a study of such topics as structuralism, narratology, debates about genealogy, deconstruction, psychoanalytic theory, gender and performativity. Readings may include texts by Nietzsche, Saussure, Barthes, Foucault, Derrida, Eco, Austin, Cixous, and Sedgwick."
ENGL 395 "Technical Writing" "Prerequisite: ENGL 213. This course examines written and visual strategies for communicating information in technical fields. Practice includes experience in audience analysis and visual design in the preparation of such documents as technical abstracts, reports, proposals, descriptions, and instructional manuals."
ENGL 396 "Advanced Composition and Professional Writing" "Prerequisite: ENGL 213 or placement test. This course is intended for students already in control of the essentials of composition who wish to develop their ability to write effectively for professional purposes. Emphasis is placed on writing for specific audiences within a variety of rhetorical situations and on peer revision and editing in a workshop format."
ENGL 397 "Business Writing" "Prerequisite: ENGL 213. This course examines written and visual strategies for communicating information in business contexts. Practice includes experience in audience analysis and visual design in the creation of such business documents as letters, memos, minutes, brochures, press releases, and company newsletters."
ENGL 398 "Selected Topics in English" ""
ENGL 399 "Selected Topics in English" ""
ENGL 414 "Literary Publishing and Editing " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Creative Writing program and ENGL 225 or 226 or 227, or permission of the Department. This course explores the process of founding and operating small presses or magazines, and follows the creation of a book from manuscript to the marketplace. It includes accessing primary research materials; understanding how the writer and editor collaborate to arrive at the best possible literary text for publication; agents, copyright contracts and other essential issues for writers; understanding the parts of a book; the design and production values that make a good book; and the transition from print to digital."
ENGL 415 "Literary Production: Curating and Archiving the Literary Event " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Creative Writing program and ENGL 225 or 226 or 227, or permission of the Department. This course introduces contemporary modes of distributing literary production. Students conceive, implement, and manage all aspects of a reading series, including the development of a mandate, solicitation and review of materials, event organization, and the introduction of work online, verbally, and in print. Students also aid in the development and maintenance of a related blog and an archive of current and previous reading series."
ENGL 416 "The Solo Play " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Creative Writing program and ENGL 227 and ENGL 344, or permission of the Department. This focused workshop explores the nature, structure, and practice of writing solo works for the stage. A solo play is written for a single actor who may play one or more characters. It emphasizes the audience-performer communication while remaining fundamentally theatrical in its codes. By the end of the course, the student will have completed a 40- to 60-minute solo piece."
ENGL 428 "Advanced Studies in Creative Writing" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Creative Writing program, or permission of the Department. See current Undergraduate Class Schedule for specific workshop prerequisites. This course is an advanced workshop intended for students who have completed at least six credits of workshops at the 300 or 400 level in an appropriate field. The subject and prerequisites for each year are found in the current Undergraduate Class Schedule. Submission of a brief portfolio may be required for admission."
ENGL 429 "Advanced Studies in Creative Writing" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Creative Writing program, or permission of the Department. See current Undergraduate Class Schedule for specific workshop prerequisites. This course is an advanced workshop intended for students who have completed at least six credits of workshops at the 300 or 400 level in an appropriate field. The subject and prerequisites for each year are found in the current Undergraduate Class Schedule. Submission of a brief portfolio may be required for admission."
ENGL 430 "Old English" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course studies the language, literature, and culture of the Anglo-Saxon era, including such texts as elegaic lyrics and sections of "
ENGL 432 "Middle English" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course studies the variety of texts in English dialects from 1200 to 1500, including such works as "
ENGL 433 "Gender and Sexuality in the Middle Ages" "This course investigates, through such discourses as literature, law, and natural philosophy, debates about misogyny and courtly love, virginity and chastity, marriage, reproduction, same-sex desire, and female autonomy. Works are selected from such writers as Chretien de Troyes, Langland, Heloise dArgenteuil, Christine de Pizan, Margery Kempe, and Julian of Norwich."
ENGL 434 "Advanced Studies in Early English Literature" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course is a seminar on a selected topic, text, or author."
ENGL 435 "Women Writers of the Early Modern Period" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course examines the emergence into print of women writers from the late-16th to the late-17th centuries, by exploring such issues as the construction of literary history, histories of gender and sexuality, the relations between gender and genre. Works are chosen from such writers as Sidney, Sowernam, Wroth, Cary, Lanyer, Philips, Cavendish, Behn, Killigrew, Manley, and Trotter."
ENGL 436 "Literature of the Civil War and Commonwealth Period" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course studies the prose and poetry of the 1630s through the 1650s. It explores the ways in which the Civil War was represented by such writers as Herrick, Suckling, Cowley, Bradstreet, Milton and Marvell. Political tracts, journalism, and private papers and diaries may also form part of the material of the course."
ENGL 437 "Advanced Studies in Renaissance and Early Modern Writing" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course is a seminar on a selected topic, text, or author."
ENGL 438 "History, Politics, and Literature in the 18th Century" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course examines the relations among the categories of history, politics, and literature, and their development as distinct discourses over the course of the century, through a study of such topics as the status of religion, the rise of science, the expansion of empire, the development of aesthetic discourse, and the construction of the category of the neoclassical."
ENGL 439 "The Rise of Criticism and Literary History" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course traces the joint development of the discourses of literary criticism and literary history from 1660 to the legislation assigning copyright to authors in the late-18th century. Examples are drawn from such writers as Dryden, Dennis, Addison, Shaftesbury, Hume, and Johnson."
ENGL 440 "Advanced Studies in Late-17th- and 18th-Century Writing" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course is a seminar on a selected topic, text, or author."
ENGL 441 "Forms of 18th- and 19th-Century Fiction" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course may focus on a single writer, a type of fiction such as the gothic or the epistolary, or a particular issue in the development of the novel, such as realism or the emergence of womens fiction."
ENGL 442 "Comparative 19th-Century Literature" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course studies literary developments in the United Kingdom, the United States, and Canada, including such issues as Romanticism, the development of national literatures, conceptions of place and landscape, and responses to cultural change."
ENGL 443 "Advanced Studies in 19th-Century Literature" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course is a seminar on a selected topic, text, or author."
ENGL 444 "Advanced Studies in Gender and Sexuality" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course is a seminar in the study of theories of gender and sexuality as they can be used in the interpretation of historical and/or contemporary texts."
ENGL 446 "Advanced Studies in 20th-Century Writing" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course is a seminar on a selected topic, text, or author."
ENGL 447 "Advanced Studies in Literary Theory" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course is a seminar on a selected topic, text, or author."
ENGL 449 "The American Postmodern" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course focuses on postmodern American writers in the context of the critical debates about what constitutes the postmodern: formally, generically, and politically. It considers such writers as Antin, Ashbery, Waldman, Pynchon, Barthelme, Barth, Acker, Ford, and Morrison."
ENGL 450 "Advanced Studies in American Literature" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. A seminar on a selected topic, text, or author. Specific content varies from year to year."
ENGL 451 "History and Ideology in Canadian Literature" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course studies the treatment in Canadian literature of such historical and political events, issues, and ideologies as the Conquest, the railroad, the threat of American domination, immigration, and the Canadian west."
ENGL 452 "Recent Experiments in Canadian Writing" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course studies contemporary writing that breaks with or interrogates traditional literary genres and forms. Examples are drawn from such authors as Kroetsch, Marlatt, Ondaatje, Highway, Dewdney, Mour, and Nichol."
ENGL 453 "Advanced Studies in Canadian Writing" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course is a seminar on a selected topic, text, or author."
ENGL 454 "Advanced Studies in Postcolonial Writing" "Prerequisite: Nine credits at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course is a seminar on a selected topic, text, or author."
ENGL 455 "The American Nation" "Prerequisite: Nine credits of English literature at the 300 level or permission of the Department. This course focuses on such issues in American literature as the cosmopolitan, the regional, the local, and the transnational, exploring the theoretical and literary ways in which writers enshrine, consolidate, or call into question ideas of the American nation."
ENGL 470 "Honours Seminar" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Honours English Literature and 30 credits in English. The topic of this course varies from year to year. The course provides the opportunity for final-year honours students to apply their experience of literature, literary theory, and criticism on a more advanced level."
ENGL 474 "Honours Essay" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Honours English Literature and 30 credits in English. With the permission of the Department, an honours student may arrange a tutorial program with a faculty member, culminating in the writing of a long paper."
ENGL 480 "Independent Studies" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an English program and nine credits at the 300 level. With the permission of the Department, a student may arrange a tutorial program with a faculty member."
ENGL 486 "SLS-International Literary Seminars " "Prerequisite: Permission of the coordinator of Creative Writing, or designate. This course, held at one of several locations around the world in conjunction with Summer Literary Seminars (SLS), offers intensive workshops in the writing of fiction, poetry, or drama, and includes discussion and written criticism of students work and a series of lectures. Students are expected to read widely and to submit their own work for discussion and analysis. Grading is based on participation, and on submission of a final portfolio and an essay."
ENGL 490 "Joint Tutorial in History and English" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in an English program or nine credits in English Literature. A tutorial for students in an English and History Joint Specialization program."
ENGL 498 "Advanced Topics in English" ""
ENGL 499 "Advanced Topics in English" ""
FFAR 250 "Keywords: Reading the Arts Across the Disciplines" "This course offers students with first-year standing* in the Faculty of Fine Arts a broad introduction to ideas and aesthetics in the visual and performing arts in Canada. It focuses on key concepts shaping and shaped by artistic production and reception in all artistic disciplines. Students deepen their understanding of the cultural significance and the debate that occurs around keywords across the disciplines. Over the year, students extend their powers of reading, writing, and critical thinking in lectures and tutorials."
FFAR 254 "Introduction to Food Studies: We Are What We Eat" "This course is an interdisciplinary introduction to the cultural and social processes of food creation and consumption. Students make connections between various aspects of the food world and their own roles and responsibilities within the food system. Through an exploration, not only of things eaten, but also of food spaces and food-related activities  including design, studio arts, and architecture  students discover that interactions with food are not as matter-of-fact as often assumed."
FFAR 255 "Art of Film Animation " "This course introduces animation to students with little or no background in cinema or animation studies. Topics covered include major producers of animation; concepts, such as character development; and individual artists and genres, such as anime. Upon completion of this course students are able to discuss cartoonality and naturalism as they relate to both mainstream and independent animation."
FFAR 256 "Hip Hop: Past/Present/Future " "This course examines the subculture of hip hop in its contemporary and historic forms. Students study hip hop as a political and social movement that formed in reaction to the status quo in the United States and manifests through practices such as rapping, breakdancing and graffiti. The course covers a variety of media and perspectives through class discussions, self-directed writing, and assigned readings, which are oriented to increase the students understanding of hip hop and its relationship to the changing nature of technology, corporate media, race relations and youth culture."
FFAR 257 "History and Visual Culture of Gaming " "This lecture course introduces students to digital games, their history and their relationship to contemporary art practices. Digital games are considered as a medium of play, social interaction and artistic expression. The course situates digital games in an (art) historical context in order to better understand concepts of play in a digital age and the relevance of games to current art practices, beginning with examples of earlier games and their role as material culture. Students then reconsider the roles played by the art, the artist and the player/gamer as they are situated at the intersection between art, play and technology. Class discussions address life in virtual spaces and the relationships of power, capital, gender, ethnicity and other identities to both games and contemporary digital media."
FFAR 258 "History of 20th-Century Fashion " "This course covers the history of fashion from pre-WWI through the end of the century with emphasis on Paris, London and later New York. Lectures cover important designers from each decade and other influences on fashion such as the impact of the economy, world wars and popular culture."
FFAR 259 "Art Forms of Bollywood " "This course focuses on one of the worlds most popular film genres, Bollywood, which began in the 1930s. Students study the theory, culture and historical development of film in Mumbai as well as the components of a Bollywood film  plot, music and dance, with special emphasis on the films songs. Screenings are part of the course."
FFAR 260 "The Movie Soundtrack " "This course focuses on the powerful auditory dimension of moving pictures. Since the late 1920s, a sophisticated discourse has been woven into the voice, sound effect and music recordings that accompany screen images, yet its presence and contribution is still largely unnoticed by the vast majority of viewers. Over the term, critical and listening skills are developed promoting a fuller appreciation and understanding of cinematic and televisual sound design, as well as teaching students how to use their ears as well as their eyes whenever the moving contents of a screen draw their attention."
FFAR 290 "(also listed as SOCI 290/SSDB 270)" ""
FFAR 291 "HIV/AIDS: An Interdisciplinary Introduction to Scientific, Social and Cultural Aspects" " "
FFAR 298 "Special Topics in Fine Arts" "A course at the introductory level which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of Fine Arts."
FFAR 299 "Special Topics in Fine Arts" "A course at the introductory level which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of Fine Arts."
FFAR 398 "Special Topics in Fine Arts" "A course which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of Fine Arts."
FFAR 399 "Special Topics in Fine Arts" "A course which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of Fine Arts."
FASS 291 "(also listed as SSDB 275)" ""
FASS 293 "Sexual Representation in the Fine Arts" "This introductory course surveys selected issues in sexual representation in the fine arts, primarily in the West. Media from painting and the performing arts to recent digital and interactive technologies, and genres from the classical nude and autobiography to pornography, are considered. The impact of the Sexual Revolution, feminism, and intersectionality is analyzed, with an emphasis on the diversity of sexualities and aesthetics in both the traditional and contemporary artistic environments. Although not a studio course, students may submit creative work undertaken independently as a course assignment."
FASS 392 "Queer Theory" "Prerequisite: 30 university credits; FASS 291 or SSDB 220 or SSDB 275, or permission of the Department. This course is a multidisciplinary survey of the basic post-1970 theories of sexual minorities and diversity, in their historical and cultural contexts. Authors from Michel Foucault to Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick are introduced, as well as the work of artists and performers from Derek Jarman to k.d. lang. The syllabus reflects the varying specializations of the instructors from year to year."
FINA 200 "Personal Finance" "This course is offered online. It is designed to help individuals better manage their current and future financial affairs. The course introduces the terminology and basic concepts underlying personal financial management. It helps students set goals and develop skills to conduct basic research when making personal financial decisions. The topics covered include financial planning, money management, personal income taxes, costs of consumer credit, concepts of time value of money, investing in stocks, bonds and mutual funds, mortgages, and retirement planning."
FINA 210 "Introduction to Real Estate" "This course introduces the concepts, principles, analytical methods and tools used for investment, development, and evaluation of real estate assets. The course focuses on issues such as market and feasibility analysis, investment property analysis, forms of ownership, valuation by alternate approaches, mortgages, borrower-lender relationships, investing in income property, commercial property financing, real estate investment trusts (REITs), and legal and property rights among co-owners."
FINA 230 "Introduction to Financial Management" "This course provides an overview of financial management and introduces the basic terms as well as the role finance plays in the firm and in markets. Specifically, this course covers the following topics: the importance of a working knowledge of finance to non-business students; the role of the financial manager; the differences between accounting income and cash flow and between book value and market value; the role of interest rates in the Canadian economy; the interpretation of financial ratios; the concept of time value of money; and making financial decisions."
FINA 310 "Real Estate Development and Entrepreneurship" "Prerequisite: COMM 308; FINA 210 or 450. This course focuses on fundamental concepts and analytic tools applied in real estate development. It incorporates the interdisciplinary character and the entrepreneurial nature of the development process. It covers different interactive stages and discusses the roles and motivations of various stakeholders involved in this decision-making process. In addition to the analysis of financial returns, this course may include discussion on the economic, social and environmental costs and benefits. Pedagogical methods include lectures, guest speakers, case studies, group project and field trip/property tour."
FINA 320 "Real Estate Investment" "Prerequisite: COMM 308; FINA 210. This course focuses on analytical tools used for making commercial real estate investment decisions. It introduces students to methods of estimating and analyzing basic measures of performance at the property level. Students learn how to identify financial risks associated with real estate investment and prepare discount cash flow analyses for the projected holding periods. Topics covered include the fundamentals of publicly traded real estate, real estate investment trusts (REITs) and analysis at the portfolio level. Pedagogical methods include lectures, class discussion on contemporary issues in the real estate market, guest speakers, case studies, group project and evaluation of potential commercial real estate for investment purposes."
FINA 370 "(also listed as IBUS 370)" " International Financial Management"
FINA 382 "(also listed as IBUS 382)" " Management of International Financial Institutions"
FINA 385 "Theory of Finance I" "Prerequisite: COMM 220, 308. This course is the first of two that provide a theoretical foundation upon which subsequent 400-level courses will be built. The course examines the allocation of capital in financial markets and the determination of the relative prices of financial assets. Topics covered include utility theory, arbitrage pricing theory, and asset pricing models such as the Capital Asset Pricing Model and the option pricing model. Applications explored include arbitrage, the design of markets and the appropriate responses of individuals and firms to changes in market conditions as well as to market imperfections."
FINA 395 "Theory of Finance II" "Prerequisite: COMM 220, 308; FINA 385 previously or concurrently. This course focuses on the financial theory of the firm and examines the Modigliani-Miller propositions, agency theory, and asymmetric information theory. Topics covered include capital structure and the cost of capital, investment and financing decisions, real options, valuation and issuance of new securities, mergers and acquisitions, and leveraged buyout decisions."
FINA 402 "Short-Term Financial Management" "Prerequisite: FINA 380 or 385; FINA 390 or 395. This course is concerned with the key aspects of short-term financial management. It begins with a brief coverage of the institutional environment facing the financial manager in Canada. A detailed coverage of sources for short-term borrowing and investments is presented. The structure of the Canadian financial system along with a description of the various methods of effecting payments as well as the clearing and settlement system are covered. Topics in overall liquidity management are briefly reviewed from a theoretical perspective. Traditional subjects in cash management such as collections, disbursement and control, forecasting, company bank relationship, short-term investment, and borrowing are examined next. Such new developments as electronic data interchange and EFT/POS are also examined. The course also provides a coverage of trade credit both from a theoretical positive standpoint and a normative viewpoint."
FINA 405 "Cases in Finance" "Prerequisite: FINA 380 or 385; FINA 390 or 395. This course uses case discussions to focus on the application of the principles of finance learned in FINA 385 and 395 in real-world contexts. Cases cover topics in corporate finance, investments, and financial markets and institutions."
FINA 408 "Building and Testing Trading Systems Using Technical Analysis" "Prerequisite: FINA 385, 395. This course provides a basic level of understanding of various technical analysis methodologies that are used by investment professionals and the investing public. The course examines market microstructure and order entry mechanics, high-frequency trading, behavioural finance and the efficient market hypothesis. The main topics include analysis of price charts to forecast future price trends and patterns, development and testing of a trading system, Dow theory, moving averages, momentum, sentiment, relative strength and intermarket analysis. This course is an excellent preparation for several investment industry designations. Pedagogical methods include lectures, a presentation by an industry expert, and a group project to build and test a trading system using simulation and investment software in the John Dobson  Formula Growth Investment Room."
FINA 409 "Applied Investment Analysis" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course focuses on evaluating stocks using modern valuation methods. The main topics include understanding the different investment styles, reading and interpreting financial statements from an investors perspective, industry analysis and stock analysis. Pedagogical methods include lectures, discussion of books, presentations by industry experts, use of the Formula Growth Investment Room and evaluation of potential companies for investment purposes."
FINA 410 "Investment Analysis" "Prerequisite: FINA 385, 395. This course focuses on investment valuation, particularly equity valuation, from the viewpoints of both the individual investor and the institutional investor. Students learn how to analyze industries, sectors and individual companies. Topics include a range of valuation models such as the dividend discount model, the comparable assets model, and the free cash flow model, to determine the intrinsic value of a stock. Students learn how to use investment tools such as Bloomberg for investment analysis. Students are required to prepare an industry analysis and stock recommendation using live data at the end of the course."
FINA 411 "Portfolio Management" "Prerequisite: FINA 385, 395. This course focuses on modern investment theory and its application to portfolio management for individuals and institutions, such as mutual funds, hedge funds, pension plans and endowments. Topics include: a) construction of optimal portfolios, b) theory and tests of the classic capital asset pricing models, c) arbitrage pricing theory and multifactor models, d) criteria for evaluation of investment performance, and e) some of the latest strategies in active and passive portfolio management. In addition to the textbook, students read journal articles, discuss cases and learn investment software in the John Dobson  Formula Growth Investment Room."
FINA 412 "Options and Futures" "Prerequisite: FINA 380 or 385; FINA 390 or 395. This course is a comprehensive analysis of the options and futures markets in North America. The student is introduced to the different markets for these instruments and their institutional details. The different types of options and futures currently trading are examined. The principles of valuation of futures and options, their use in risk management through hedging techniques and their use in speculative strategies are studied. Emphasis is placed on the analysis of financial options and futures."
FINA 413 "Advanced Topics in Derivative Markets" "Prerequisite: FINA 412. This course focuses on advanced topics in the area of derivatives. Topics covered include the valuation of derivatives using numerical procedures and martingales, modelling the term structure of interest rates, valuation of interest rate swaps, interest rate options, caps, floors, swaptions and exotic options, and application of derivatives in risk management such as value at risk models, estimation of volatility and credit risk derivatives."
FINA 415 "Mergers and Acquisitions" "Prerequisite: FINA 380 or 385; FINA 390 or 395. This course examines the financial aspects of mergers and acquisitions. Basic financial theory and empirical evidence related to corporate control activity is discussed. Some of the topics covered include target identification and valuation, bidding strategies, defensive strategies, financing strategies and growth by acquisition strategies. In addition, going private transactions such as leverage buyouts and management buyouts are discussed."
FINA 416 "Behavioural Finance " "Prerequisite: FINA 385, 395. This course examines how the behaviour of managers, boards of directors, or financial analysts deviates from models of rational behaviour in some situations, and how these deviations affect shareholder wealth. The course explores how behavioural characteristics like mental accounting, overconfidence, herding, framing and loss aversion cause the assumptions of rational economic behaviour to break down at both the individual and systemic levels."
FINA 420 "Real Estate Finance" "Prerequisite: COMM 308; FINA 210. The course focuses on concepts, principles and analytical methods of real estate finance. It begins with a comprehensive investigation of mortgages from the perspective of both borrowers and lenders. The basics are then applied to analyze mortgage risk, commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), market and mortgage securitization, as well as investment decisions on acquisition and financing of commercial real estate assets. Pedagogical methods include lectures, class discussions on contemporary issues, guest speakers, case studies, group project and risk analysis of mortgage-backed securities."
FINA 455 "Seminar in Finance" "This course is intended primarily for Finance Majors and Minors. It provides an opportunity for more intensive study in one or more specific topics of finance. The topic varies according to the special interests of the professor and the students. Enrolment is restricted and is subject to departmental approval."
FINA 465 "Trading in Financial Securities" "Prerequisite: FINA 412; permission of the Department. This course focuses on developing practical skills in trading financial securities. Topics covered include general trading practices, fundamental and technical analysis, term structure of interest rates, arbitrage opportunities, and trading strategies using options, futures and options on futures contracts. Speakers from the finance industry are also invited to share their experiences with the students."
FINA 470 "International Finance" "Prerequisite: FINA 385, 395. This course introduces students to the essentials of international financial management. After a brief introduction to the international monetary system, we study the organization of the foreign currency and international financial markets. The course then discusses the determinants of exchange rates, followed by a discussion of the risks that businesses operating in international markets face due to changing exchange rates and financial turmoil in international financial markets. The subsequent sections of the course are devoted to understanding techniques and strategies for managing different types of exchange risks after various foreign currency derivatives  forward, futures, options and swaps  have been studied."
FINA 471 "Multinational Financial Management" "Prerequisite: FINA 470. This course addresses advanced issues that corporations or investors face when they expand their operations in the international markets. Corporations face challenges in the areas of international capital budgeting, determining their cost of capital and their capital structure, assessment of political risk, international working capital management, financing international trade and international corporate governance. This course discusses how these decisions become more complex in an international environment due to changing exchange rates and multiplicity of economic and political environments. The course also addresses the difficulties of choosing appropriate pricing models in an international context."
FINA 481 "Management of Financial Institutions" "Prerequisite: FINA 385, 395. This course provides students with an integrating framework for examining various types of financial institutions and the means of managing their operations. Topics include uniqueness of financial institutions; application of portfolio and corporate finance theories to the management of assets, liabilities, capital structure and off-balance sheet operations; interest rate and liquidity risk exposure; loan portfolio management, loan pricing and credit rationing; capital adequacy and regulatory environment. The strategic repercussions for such institutions, given the rapidly changing financial and regulatory environments, are also reviewed through the analysis of cases illustrating current issues."
FINA 482 "International Banking: Operations, Policy and Strategy" "Prerequisite: FINA 481 previously or concurrently. This course provides students with an integrating framework to understand the risks, challenges and opportunities that banks face in their global operations. The course covers both commercial and investment banking activities in mature as well as emerging markets. The course begins with an examination of opportunities that foreign markets offer as well as difficulties that banks face when dealing with unfamiliar economic and political environments abroad. This is followed by a discussion of banking operations in international and foreign markets. Topics for this discussion may include microfinance, international loans, project financing and an assessment of political or sovereign risks. The impact of foreign operations on mitigation or enhancement of various risks associated with home country operations is examined. The course also examines the importance of global regulation as well as governance and ethical issues associated with international banking."
FINA 495 "Honours Seminar in Finance" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the honours program. This seminar is offered to honours students in Finance over a period of two terms. In the first term, the seminar covers methodology and recent advances in research in topics covered in the Finance curriculum. In addition, students begin working on a thesis/project to be conducted under the supervision of a faculty member. In the second term, students complete their thesis/project and are required to submit a written report to be presented at the seminar at the end of the term."
FMST 200 "Introduction to Film Studies" "A survey course acquainting the student with the art of the film and the basic methods of analysis. The technical and critical terminology of film studies is discussed. Popular literature on film, such as reviews, is analyzed and the more specialized film literature is introduced. Directors whose films are usually viewed include Bergman, Eisenstein, Fellini, Ford, Hitchcock, Kurosawa, Lubitsch, Keaton, and Welles."
FMST 211* "History of Film to 1959" "The evolution of the forms and themes of world cinema from its origin to 1959, in relation to its cultural, social, and political contexts. Special emphasis is placed on film historical methodology, focusing on approaches based on genre, auteur, national cinemas, social history, particular cinematic modes, or other frameworks. Weekly screenings."
FMST 211* "Lhistoire du cinma jusqu 1959" "Ce cours couvre lvolution des formes et des thmatiques cinmatographiques depuis leur dbut jusqu 1959 et les place dans leur contexte culturel, social et politique. Laccent est mis principalement sur la mthodologie de lhistoire du cinma tout en privilgiant plusieurs angles dapproche: genre, cinma dauteur, cinma national, histoire sociale, forme cinmatographique particulire ou dautres grilles. Visionnements hebdomadaires."
FMST 212* "Film Aesthetics" "A study of the aesthetics of film. Topics include film criticism, theories about the fundamental elements of film, and comparisons between films which do not depend on their date of production. Problems of film description, interpretation, and evaluation are discussed. Weekly screenings."
FMST 213 "Introduction to Film Genres" "This course introduces students to the concept of genre through the case study of genre films. By exploring genre conventions and aesthetic features in historical context, the course addresses how genres are established, and how they develop, evolve, and travel. It also explores their relation to society, industry and art cinema."
FMST 214 "Canadian Cinema" "A survey of Canadian film from the earliest surviving works to the present. Topics include fiction, documentary, animation, and experimental film, as well as the role of the National Film Board. The course includes discussions of national and transnational cinema within the Canadian context. Weekly screenings."
FMST 215 "Le cinma qubcois" "Tour dhorizon du cinma qubcois mettant laccent sur des uvres contemporaines. Les films sont examins en fonction de leur valeur culturelle et politique. On y traite galement de la structure de lindustrie du cinma au Qubec et du rle jou, entre autres, par lOffice national du film. Visionnements hebdomadaires."
FMST 216 "Methods in Film Studies" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major, Minor or Specialization in Film Studies. This writing-intensive course focuses on developing discipline-specific skills for the study of cinema and the moving image. It supplements the formal and aesthetic approaches to film analysis with broader questions about seeing, interpreting and understanding cinema. By completing a broad range of assignments designed to test various academic approaches to film analysis, students become acquainted with different methodologies that are currently in use within the discipline."
FMST 217 "First Peoples Cinema" "An examination of representation by and of Indigenous peoples in film and video. The emphasis is on Turtle Island and other parts of the Americas, but important works from other continents may be included. Films and videos, both mainstream and experimental, are discussed in the context of post-colonial theory, socio-cultural history, and contemporary aesthetic issues. Weekly screenings."
FMST 218 "History of Animation Film" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Mel Hoppenheim School of Cinema or written permission of the School of Cinema. A survey of animated film from the first decade of the 20th century to the present. Styles of animation viewed and discussed include abstract experimental film of the 1920s, Disney Studio films and computer animation. The contribution of the National Film Board of Canada and particularly that of Norman McLaren is considered. Weekly screenings."
FMST 311 "Montage Aesthetic" "Prerequisite: FMST 212. An intensive study of montage as an element of film style. Beginning with the work of D.W. Griffith, developments in film editing are followed through French Avant-Garde and Russian films of the 1920s to contemporary film. Weekly screenings."
FMST 312 "Moving Camera Aesthetic" "Prerequisite: FMST 212. An intensive study of camera movement as an element of film style. Consideration is given to relations between long takes, deep-focus cinematography, and camera movement, as well as to the role of camera movement in creating the signification of film. Films by Murnau, Renoir, Welles, Ophuls, and Snow are included among those viewed and discussed. Weekly screenings."
FMST 313 "Film Comedy I" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing.* An introduction to film comedy in the silent and sound eras. The visual and verbal sources of comedy are analyzed through the study of films ranging from Mack Sennett and Buster Keaton to Woody Allen and Jacques Tati. Weekly screenings."
FMST 315 "Introduction to Film Theory" "Prerequisite: FMST 211 or 212, or 18 credits in Film Studies, or written permission of the School of Cinema. This course familiarizes students with some of the major developments in film theory and further develops their critical skills in approaching complex theoretical texts and concepts. Students examine a variety of theoretical writings concerned with aesthetic, social and psychological aspects of the cinema, including questions of spectatorship, ideology, gender, technology, and authorship."
FMST 316 "Film and Moving Image Cultures" "Prerequisite: FMST 211 or 212, or 18 credits in Film Studies, or written permission of the School of Cinema. This course studies extra-textual elements of cinema, such as production histories, stardom, film education, and, more generally, issues in the dissemination of film cultures around the world including screens, apparatuses, cinephilia, fandom and festivals."
FMST 317 "Transnational Approaches to Cinema" "Prerequisite: FMST 211 or 212, or 18 credits in Film Studies, or written permission of the School of Cinema. This course introduces students to geo-political approaches to cinema, which question the primacy of the national as a determining category of analysis. This course emphasizes the transnational flow of global media production and circulation, and offers comparative perspectives on film movements and practices."
FMST 318 "Experimental Film" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing.* An examination of experimental film emphasizing developments from the late 1940s to the present. The New American Cinema is considered in relation to other North American and European experimental cinemas, and examples of the historical antecedents of recent experimental films are viewed and discussed. Weekly screenings."
FMST 319 "The Moving Image and Society" "Prerequisite: FMST 211 or 212, or 18 credits in Film Studies, or written permission of the School of Cinema. This course explores the ways in which cinema and moving images shape ideologies of class, gender and race. Through a selection of key theoretical texts from cultural studies and related scholarly traditions, this course investigates the centrality of visual experience to everyday life. Through a selection of screenings and readings, students learn how the production and consumption of visual cultures intersect with issues of identity and historical consciousness. The aim of this course is to enable students to analyze different ideological aspects of film and the moving image."
FMST 320 "Digital Media and Animation" "Prerequisite: FMST 211 or 212, or 18 credits in Film Studies, or written permission of the School of Cinema. This course introduces students to the proliferating forms of contemporary animation, and to the critical debates around digital media in which animation plays a central role. The course examines new forms of animation, including "
FMST 322 "History of Film since 1959" "Prerequisite: FMST 211 or second-year standing.* A cross-cultural historical examination of selected aspects of world cinema since 1959, including trends in documentary and experimental film. The principal focus on European and American cinema is contextualized through reference to Canadian, Japanese, and Third World film. A range of perspectives is introduced, including genre and auteur study, formal analysis, and feminist analysis. Films are studied in their political and cultural contexts. Weekly screenings."
FMST 325 "Studies in Film Acting and Performance" "Prerequisite: *FMST 211 or 212, or 18 credits in Film Studies, or written permission of the School of Cinema. An introduction to the critical study and analysis of film acting and performance. The course includes a survey of acting styles and practices. Performance styles are studied in relation to authorship, the film industry, stardom, scriptwriting, film technique, film genre, documentary and the other performing arts. The course helps students to become conversant with the multidimensional subject of acting for the screen."
FMST 326 "Approaches to World Cinema " "Prerequisite: Second-year standing.* The course investigates films, film movements, filmmakers and film industries worldwide focusing on transnationalism as well as specific geopolitical cultural contexts. Among the possible topics: contemporary global art cinema and festivals, global and regional economies of film and media, film movements and genres, transcultural and diasporic cinemas, Third Cinema, postcoloniality and eurocentrism, international co-productions, practices of dubbing and subtitling."
FMST 328 "Non-fiction Film Since 1956" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing.* A cross-cultural survey of contemporary developments in the documentary film. The course begins with the precursors of "
FMST 329 "Women and Film" "Prerequisite: FMST 211 or second-year standing.* An examination of films made by women, film criticism written by women, and the portrayal of women in films. These topics are considered within the context of film history and with an emphasis on their relation to ideas in contemporary feminist theory. Weekly screenings."
FMST 330 "Film Sound" "Prerequisite: FMST 211 or 212, or 18 credits in Film Studies, or written permission of the School of Cinema. This course provides an introduction to the concepts and language necessary to think and write cogently about the importance of sound in the cinema. It covers issues of technology, aesthetics and sound design in relation to the history of cinema as an audiovisual medium. Weekly readings and screenings offer students key analytical tools to better understand the soundscapes and soundtracks of a variety of film practices."
FMST 331 "Film Directors" "Prerequisite: FMST 211 or 212, or 18 credits in Film Studies, or written permission of the School of Cinema. This course provides a concentrated study of the work of selected major directors of narrative, documentary and experimental cinema. Concepts and theories of authorship are incorporated into close analysis of selected bodies of work. The films are considered in terms of thematic and stylistic consistency and variation as well as biographical, social, and political factors."
FMST 332 "Issues in Independent Cinema" "Prerequisite: FMST 211 or second-year standing.* An intensive study of selected tendencies in cinema produced outside the mainstream of the film industry. Topics may include documentary, video art, experimental or narrative film, or particular convergences of these modes of film practice. Topics will vary according to the instructors specialization."
FMST 335 "Aspects of National Cinemas" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing.* An examination of films as reflections of national cultures. Films by a range of directors representing one or several national groupings such as Japan, Brazil, Eastern Europe, Great Britain, or contemporary West Germany are discussed in the context of their aesthetic, cultural, and political aspirations. Weekly screenings."
FMST 336 "Documentary Film of the Classical Period" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing. This course is a cross-cultural survey of the history of the documentary film from its origins in early cinema to the emergence of direct cinema in the postwar period. Emphasis is placed on both the artistic achievement and the theoretical, cultural, and political context of nonfiction film during the first half of the 20th century. Directors studied may include Flaherty, Grierson, Lorentz, Ivens, Riefenstahl, Shub, Vertov, and Vigo."
FMST 337 "Topics in American Cinema" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing.* A lecture or seminar course which provides an opportunity for the study of limited and more specialized aspects of U.S. cinema. Topics may include individual genres, directors, production studios, historical periods, or aspects of independent cinema. Topics vary from year to year according to the instructors field of specialization."
FMST 348 "Special Topics in Art and Film" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Art History and Film Studies; ARTH 200 and FMST 212; or written permission of the program director. A comparative examination of some aspects of film studies and art history."
FMST 350 "Studies in Film Genres" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing*; FMST 211 or 322. An intensive analysis of one or two film genres, which assumes previous experience in film-genre studies. The genre is discussed in terms of its structural characteristics and the ways in which it is a product of specific social situations. Weekly screenings."
FMST 391 "Sexual Representation in Cinema" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing* or six credits in the Major or Minor in Interdisciplinary Studies in Sexuality. An investigation ofcinematic sexual imagery as art, communication and socio-cultural phenomenon. Weekly screenings of films and videos, representing fiction, experimental and documentary genres, as well as different historical and cultural contexts, are related to theoretical readings, both classical and contemporary, by authors from Freud and the Surrealists to Foucault and recent feminist and queer theorists. Contemporary issues such as pornography, autobiography, and the HIV epidemic are confronted. Learning is interdisciplinary, interactive and group-oriented."
FMST 392 "Queer Cinema I" "An interdisciplinary, cross-cultural survey of queer cinema and video. Selected phases in the historical trajectory of LGBTQ film are highlighted, both underground and mainstream, including studies of representative major artists from Jean Cocteau and Dorothy Arzner to Patricia Rozema and Derek Jarman. Problems in the depiction of sexual minorities are analyzed, and a selection of the principal aesthetic, theoretical and socio-political issues raised by queer theory and cultural production is introduced."
FMST 393 "Queer Cinema II" "Prerequisite: FMST 392. An extension of FMST 392. An in-depth focus on selected historical, aesthetic, and theoretical issues, which vary from year to year according to the expertise of faculty."
FMST 398 "Special Topics in Film Studies" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing.* A course which provides an opportunity for the study of limited and more specialized aspects of film studies."
FMST 399 "Special Topics in Film Studies" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing.* A course which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of film studies outside the scope of existing courses."
FMST 409 "Seminar in Women and Film" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. An advanced course in the study of films made by women, as well as of the representation of women in films. The topics selected for study may vary from year to year and are considered within the context of film history, contemporary feminist philosophy, and feminist film theory. Students are expected to conduct independent research for class presentation."
FMST 410 "Seminar in Gender, Sexuality and Media" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. An advanced interdisciplinary course in gender, identity and politics in cinema and media. Topics may vary from year to year, drawing on approaches from feminist, masculinity, queer, sexuality and gender/transgender studies. Sexuality is approached as an art, a form of communication and socio-cultural phenomenon, focusing on cinema and other moving image and sound-based media. Regular screenings accompany theoretical, historical and critical readings."
FMST 411 "Seminar in Screen Cultures" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. An advanced, interdisciplinary approach to the study of cinema and media cultures which draws on historical and theoretical approaches to old and new screen-based forms. Topics include issues of exhibition, distribution, industry, art institutions and other socio-cultural and historical issues related to moving image cultures. Regular screenings accompany theoretical, historical and critical readings."
FMST 412 "Seminar in Geographies of Cinema" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. An advanced study of cinema and the ways in which space, place and geopolitical borders shape aesthetic, industrial, cultural and political dynamics of moving images and sound. This course may include national, regional, local, urban, rural and international and transnational approaches. Regular screenings accompany theoretical, historical and critical readings."
FMST 414 "Seminar in Film Directors" "Prerequisite: 18 credits in Film Studies and written permission of the School of Cinema. A seminar for advanced students which provides for more concentrated study of the work of specific film directors. The director or directors whose films are chosen for study varies from year to year according to the instructors field of specialization."
FMST 416 "Seminar in Film History" "Prerequisite: 18 credits in Film Studies and written permission of the School of Cinema. A seminar for advanced students which provides for the study of limited and more specialized areas of film history. The areas chosen for study vary from year to year according to the instructors field of specialization."
FMST 418 "Seminar in Canadian Cinema" "Prerequisite: FMST 214 or COMS 316, and written permission of the School of Cinema. A seminar in which selected aspects of Canadian film are examined and discussed. The areas chosen for study vary from year to year according to the instructors field of specialization."
FMST 419 "Sminaire sur le cinma qubcois" "Pralable: FMST 215, ainsi que permission crite de lcole de cinma. Un sminaire dans lequel des aspects slectifs du cinma qubcois sont analyss et discuts. Les sujets dtude choisis varient danne en anne selon la spcialisation de linstructeur."
FMST 420 "Seminar in Critical Media Practices" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. This course brings together critical readings and practices across media forms with an emphasis on blending theory and creative work. Topics may include curating practices, video essays, collaborative media practices and web journalism."
FMST 422 "Seminar in Film Theory and Criticism" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. This seminar provides an in-depth and focused engagement with discourses on cinema from different cultural traditions and theoretical perspectives. Specific topics may vary from year to year andwill be placed in dialogue with a range of film and media materials."
FMST 423 "Seminar in Stylistic and Formal Analysis" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. An intensive course in the analysis of film style. Films are examined using an analytical projector in order to discover their formal and thematic structures. The contribution of cinematographers, editors, scriptwriters, directors, and performers to the development of a style are discussed. Weekly screenings."
FMST 424 "Seminar in Film Narrative" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. An examination of conventions of film narrative from a theoretical and historical point of view. Innovations in narrative structure are discussed and consideration is given to the origin, development, and transformation of narrative traditions in their cultural and aesthetic context."
FMST 426 "Professional Internship I" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing* in the Major in Film Studies or the Specialization in Film Studies; written permission of the School of Cinema. A Film Studies student who has been commissioned to work in such areas as film research, archival work, editing film publications, or writing film criticism, may seek permission to apply three credits towards the Film Studies degree program. A written proposal describing the project must be submitted prior to the work taking place in order to determine the appropriateness of the level and scope of the project. The School of Cinema must be satisfied that the work will be done under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time Cinema faculty member."
FMST 427 "Professional Internship II" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing* in the Major in Film Studies or the Specialization in Film Studies; written permission of the School of Cinema. A student repeating FMST 426 registers for credit under FMST 427."
FMST 428 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 24 credits completed in Film Studies; written permission of the Department. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required. This course offers a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced research under the supervision of a full-time Cinema faculty member. A written agreement between the student and the supervisor shall clearly state the nature of the students research, the scope of the project, and the work schedule. The study workload should be equivalent to a three-credit course in the program. Independent study may not duplicate curriculum offerings."
FMST 429 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: FMST 428; 24 credits completed in Film Studies; written permission of the Department. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required. This course offers a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced research under the supervision of a full-time Cinema faculty member. A written agreement between the student and the supervisor shall clearly state the nature of the students research, the scope of the project, and the work schedule. The study workload should be equivalent to a three-credit course in the program. Independent study may not duplicate curriculum offerings."
FMST 448 "Advanced Seminar in Art and Film" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Art History and Film Studies; ARTH 348 or FMST 348; or written permission of the program director. A seminar designed to permit an in-depth course of study on some aspects of art and film history."
FMST 450 "Film Studies Specialization Seminar" "Prerequisite: Second-year standing* in the Specialization in Film Studies; written permission of the School of Cinema. This intensive seminar includes workshops in research methodology, in advanced study and career planning, and in the practice of criticism, publication, preservation, and programming. The relation of film studies to filmmaking practice, the role of changing technology, and the current cultural context of the discipline are discussed by visiting experts from both within the University and the community at large. The course brings together all students in the Specialization in Film Studies."
FMST 498 "Special Topics in Film Studies" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. A lecture or seminar course for advanced students which provides an opportunity for the study of limited and more specialized aspects of film studies."
FMAN 203 "Introduction to Animation I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 255 concurrently; or written permission of the School of Cinema. A studio course introducing the study and practice of film animation. Students are taught the fundamentals of motion analysis and frame-by-frame filmmaking, basic character animation, camera layouts, exposure sheets and character design."
FMAN 204 "Introduction to Animation II" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 203; FMAN 256 previously or concurrently; or written permission of the School of Cinema. A continuation on a more advanced level of FMAN 203. Students produce their first animated film project."
FMAN 225 "Analytical Drawing and Design for Animation" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; or written permission of the School of Cinema. An analytical approach to various elements supporting the concept of representation, including character design, virtual space and perception. The concept of drawing is expanded beyond observational drawing."
FMAN 255 "Technical Aspects for Animation I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 203 concurrently; or written permission of the School of Cinema. A studio course introducing students to the use of software and equipment in the production of frame-by-frame films. Students learn the technical aspects of animation software and analog animation production equipment."
FMAN 256 "Technical Aspects for Animation II" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 203, 255; FMAN 204 previously or concurrently; or written permission of the School of Cinema. A continuation on a more advanced level of FMAN 255. Students further explore the use of software and equipment for the production of frame-by-frame film."
FMAN 300 "Under-Camera Animation" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 204, 225, 256; or written permission of the School of Cinema. An intensive, hands-on introduction to the art, practice, and multiple techniques of direct animation, creating, photographing and erasing original images directly under the animation camera. Through a series of short exercises, guest lectures, and workshops, students explore the immediacy of a direct mark-making animation practice."
FMAN 301 "Expanded Animation Practices" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 204, 256; or enrolment in the Faculty of Fine Arts; second-year standing with 66 or fewer credits remaining in degree program and written permission of the School of Cinema. A studio course experimenting with the art of film animation through short group projects informed by individual student interests in Fine Arts practices. This course introduces students from Film Animation and other Fine Arts disciplines to the collaborative exploration of a variety of direct animation techniques. Enhanced by field trips and guest lectures, students are introduced to the unique language of film animation and independent auteur-driven expressions of animation filmmaking."
FMAN 307 "Intermediate Animation I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Animation; FMAN 204, 225, 256; or written permission of the School of Cinema. A continuation of FMAN 204 with emphasis on exploring the art of animation filmmaking. Students explore film language, sound design, editing and enhance their knowledge of film-planning strategies and various frame-by-frame filmmaking techniques."
FMAN 308 "Intermediate Animation II" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Animation; FMAN 307; or written permission of the School of Cinema. A continuation of FMAN 307. This course allows students to further explore the planning and production of frame-by-frame animation filmmaking."
FMAN 311 "Digital Animation and Creative Compositing" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 204, 225, 256; or written permission of the School of Cinema. This course is designed to permit an in-depth exploration of various digital media by animating, editing and compositing animated media following the spirit of contemporary animated film. Exercises include exploration of digitally drawn or scanned elements, digital cut-outs, green screen and innovative stop-motion animation techniques. Emphasis is on personal expression, motion graphics and enhancement of professional animation skills."
FMAN 315 "From Idea to Storyboard" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Animation; FMAN 204, 225, 256; or written permission of the School of Cinema. An exploration of the visual and written development of ideas and scripts in storyboard form. Students engage in creative and experimental exercises including timing, planning the soundtrack and creating animatics."
FMAN 319 "Character Animation" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 204, 225, 256; or written permission of the School of Cinema. An examination of the fundamentals of character animation, its theory, techniques, and application to contemporary studio situations. Exercises in character creation, design and dramatization are directed towards the students particular interests and styles."
FMAN 325 "Advanced Analytical Drawing and Design for Animation" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 225; or written permission of the School of Cinema upon presentation of a portfolio. A continuation on a more advanced level of FMAN 225. An in-depth focus on drawing for animation film."
FMAN 340 "Sound for Animation Film" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Animation; FMAN 204, 225, 256; or written permission of the School of Cinema. An introduction to sound production theory, techniques and applications specific to animation films. Starting from the fundamentals of audio recording and multi-channel mixing, students progress through a series of hands-on workshops and exercises culminating in a fully realized soundtrack for an animation film."
FMAN 350 "Introduction to Stop-Motion Animation" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 204, 225, 256; or written permission of the School of Cinema. An intensive hands-on seminar and workshop in the art and craft of stop-motion animation. This course is designed to acquaint the student with photographic and animation techniques in stop-motion. Puppets, clay and other techniques are explored. Emphasis is placed on animation skills within the stop-motion process. Basic model, puppet and set construction are introduced, as well as use of materials and lighting. Study of recent developments in international styles and techniques is included."
FMAN 355 "Introduction to 3D Digital Animation" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 204, 256; or written permission of the School of Cinema. An intensive technical course in the art and creation of 3D computer graphics. Students learn to use 3D software and related applications for 3D computer animation, modelling, rigging, lighting and texture."
FMAN 398 "Special Topics in Film Animation" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. An opportunity for study of limited and more specialized aspects of film animation."
FMAN 402 "Advanced Animation Filmmaking" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Animation; FMAN 308, 315, 340 previously or concurrently; FMST 212, 218. A continuation on a more advanced level of FMAN 308. Students produce a major animation film project using the medium of their choice."
FMAN 436 "Digital Post-Production for Animation" "Prerequisite: FMAN 204, 256; or written permission of the School of Cinema. This course is both technical and aesthetically oriented, designed to develop an understanding of montage in terms of pacing, rhythm, transitions, and continuity. Working on a series of exercises, students are introduced to the digital postproduction process in film and animation. Topics include such elements as video signals, digital video formats, colour correction, codecs, and compression."
FMAN 437 "Animated Special Effects" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Film Animation program; FMAN 256; or written permission of the School of Cinema. Through a series of short exercises, students are introduced to the art of special effects creation, learning digital animated effects and practical special effects."
FMAN 440 "Advanced 3D Digital Animation" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Animation; FMAN 355; or written permission of the School of Cinema. A continuation on a more advanced level of FMAN 355. An intensive technical course in the art and creation of 3D computer graphics. Students work with 3D software and related applications for advanced 3D computer animation, modelling, rigging, lighting and texture. Students are encouraged to explore the aesthetic combinations of digital 3D, 2D and other animation techniques in exercises and projects."
FMAN 446 "Professional Internship I" "Prerequisite: FMAN 203, 225, 256; written permission of the School of Cinema. A Film Animation student who will be employed within the film industry during the same calendar year may seek permission to apply three credits towards the Film Animation degree program. A written proposal describing the project must be submitted prior to the work taking place in order to determine the appropriateness of the level and scope of the project. The School of Cinema must be satisfied that the work will be done under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time Cinema faculty member."
FMAN 447 "Professional Internship II" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. A student who has received credit for FMAN 446 and wishes to do a second professional internship registers for FMAN 447."
FMAN 448 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 24 credits completed in Film Animation; written permission of the School of Cinema. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required. This course offers a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced research under the supervision of a full-time Cinema faculty member. A written agreement between the student and the supervisor shall clearly state the nature of the students research, the scope of the project, and the work schedule. The study workload should be equivalent to a three-credit course in the program. Independent study may not duplicate curriculum offerings."
FMAN 449 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: FMAN 448; 24 credits completed in Film Animation; written permission of the School of Cinema. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required. This course offers a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced research under the supervision of a full-time Cinema faculty member. A written agreement between the student and the supervisor shall clearly state the nature of the students research, the scope of the project, and the work schedule. The study workload should be equivalent to a three-credit course in the program. Independent study may not duplicate curriculum offerings."
FMAN 450 "Advanced Stop-Motion Animation" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Animation; FMAN 350; or written permission of the School of Cinema. A continuation on a more advanced level of FMAN 350. An in-depth, hands-on course in the art and craft of stop-motion animation. Emphasis is on fine-tuning animation skills within the stop-motion process."
FMAN 498 "Special Topics in Film Animation" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. A course for advanced students which provides an opportunity for the study of limited and more specialized aspects of film animation."
FMPR 231 "Filmmaking I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Production; or enrolment in the Specialization in Film Studies and written permission of the School of Cinema. A comprehensive course introducing students to the art of making motion pictures. This course stresses the individual students creative efforts and expression through filmmaking. Students are expected to master basic technique and theory. Students use digital resources for acquisition and post-production. The course may require mandatory workshops outside of class time."
FMPR 239 "Montage I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Production; FMPR 231; FMST 211, 212 concurrently. An introduction to the technical workflows and software applications used in the film production program. Students explore the theory and technique of editing as it applies to different genres of filmmaking.The course may require mandatory workshops outside of class time."
FMPR 332 "Filmmaking II" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Production; FMPR 231, 239; FMST 211, 212; FMPR 338, 340 concurrently. An intermediate course that explores the theory, technique and practice of filmmaking. The course emphasizes idea development, creative process, production planning, methods of production and post-production. Diverse course sections include approaches to fiction and non-fiction. Students use digital resources for acquisition and post-production."
FMPR 335 "Acting and Directing Acting for the Screen I" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema; FMPR 332 previously or concurrently, or six credits in Acting for the Theatre. This studio course for Cinema and Theatre students explores directing and performing for film; exercises are recorded on video for analysis. Both performers and directors examine acting and directing acting for the camera through such topics as role preparation, character development, and performance continuity."
FMPR 336 "Introduction to Film Producing" "Prerequisite: FMPR 231 or written permission of the School of Cinema. A comprehensive course introducing students to the creative and administrative challenges of producing. This includes strategies for fundraising, pre-production, budgeting and scheduling techniques, legal, financial and insurance concerns, post-production, distribution, and exhibition. A broad range of genres and platforms are covered."
FMPR 338 "Image I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Production; FMPR 231, 239; FMST 211, 212; FMPR 332, 340 concurrently. A comprehensive course on the equipment and technology available to the contemporary filmmaker with a focus on the tools used by students in FMPR 332 Filmmaking II. Present-day technology is explored through the foundations of traditional camera and photographic theory toward an in-depth understanding of digital cinema. Extensive hands-on studio practice provides training in basic camera technique, lighting, and gripping. The course may require mandatory workshops outside of class time."
FMPR 340 "Sound I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Production; FMPR 231, 239; FMPR 332 concurrently; FMST 211, 212. An introductory course in the technical aspects of designing sound for cinema in support of projects undertaken in FMPR 332. The course focuses on location recording, studio recording, and multi-track editing for layered sound design. The course may require mandatory workshops outside of class time."
FMPR 341 "Writing for Film I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Production; FMPR 231, 239; FMST 211, 212. An introduction to writing for film. Students explore the written word as a means to convey and clarify visual ideas and cinematic stories. Synopses, treatments and scenarios for various genres are explored. Students are required to submit their own writing for discussion and analysis."
FMPR 343 "Production Design" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Production, FMPR 231, FMST 211 and 212; or written permission of the School of Cinema. A practical examination of the visual aspects of film production. Topics in production design considered may include texture and visual styles, the collaborative process, project management, and the nature of constraints which apply to student and independent productions."
FMPR 350 "Ways of Seeing in Film Production" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Production; FMPR 231, 239; FMST 211, 212. A forum of ideas intended to increase the students awareness of cinema as a visual medium. Aspects of our visual culture are presented and discussed: work by painters, photographers, sculptors, architects, and artists working with digital media. A relationship is made between the work of such artists and the work of the filmmaker. Students work on individual visual projects."
FMPR 361 "Approaches to Non-fiction  Selected Topics" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Production; FMPR 231, 239; FMST 211, 212. This course explores aesthetic, conceptual and methodological issues surrounding non-fiction film production. Topics include research methods, non-scripted approaches, ethics of presentation, archival or ethnographic practices in light of current platforms and technologies."
FMPR 398 "Special Topics in Film Production" "This course provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of film production outside the scope of existing courses. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
FMPR 399 "Special Topics in Film Production" "A course which provides an opportunity for the study of specialized aspects of film production outside the scope of existing courses. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
FMPR 432 "Filmmaking III" "Prerequisite: FMPR 332, 338, 340; written permission of the School of Cinema; 30 or fewer credits remaining in the degree. An advanced course building on practices established in FMPR 332. Diverse course sections include approaches to fiction and non-fiction. Students use digital resources for acquisition of moving images and post-production."
FMPR 435 "Acting and Directing Acting for the Screen II" "Prerequisite: FMPR 335 and written permission of the School of Cinema. A continuation of FMPR 335 on a more advanced level."
FMPR 438 "Image II" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Film Production or the Major in Film Production; FMPR 332, 338, 340; written permission of the School of Cinema. This course builds on the technical knowledge acquired in FMPR 338 and focuses on the art and technology of image creation for cinema in support of projects in FMPR 432. Students explore advanced topics in lighting and camera technology."
FMPR 439 "Montage II" "Prerequisite: FMPR 239; 48 credits completed. An exploration of advanced methods, approaches and techniques used by editors working in various genres of film including drama, documentary and expanded cinema."
FMPR 440 "Sound II" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Film Production or the Major in Film Production; FMPR 338, 340. The central focus of the course is creative sound design. Emphasis is on the interaction between sound and image in film and includes both individual and collective sound projects."
FMPR 441 "Writing for Film II" "Prerequisite: FMPR 341. An advanced exploration of topics covered in FMPR 341. Additional topics include adaptations of existing work for the screen and developing longer film projects. Three-act structures as well as new narrative formats and documentary approaches are explored. Students are required to submit their own writing for discussion and analysis."
FMPR 442 "Optical Printer Practice" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Major in Film Production with FMPR 338 previously or concurrently, or enrolment in the Major in Film Animation and FMAN 256, with written permission of the School of Cinema. A film production course assisting students in the understanding and application of advanced optical printer technology and aesthetics."
FMPR 444 "Expanded Cinema" "Prerequisite: FMPR 231, 239; FMST 211, 212. An advanced course introducing students to historical and current practices in expanded cinema practice. Expanded cinema emphasizes an approach to moving image-making that situates spectatorship and viewer engagement out of the confines of the traditional cinema exhibition. Students are encouraged to develop creative approaches in work that engages viewers in non-restricted spatial environments. Strong emphasis is placed on means of production and presentation that depart from established methods and models of film production."
FMPR 445 "Professional Internship" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. A Film Production student who will be employed within the film industry during the same calendar year may seek permission to apply six credits towards the Film Production degree program. A written proposal describing the project must be submitted prior to the work taking place in order to determine the appropriateness of the level and scope of the project. The School of Cinema must be satisfied that the work will be done under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time Cinema faculty member."
FMPR 446 "Professional Internship I" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. A Film Production student who will be employed within the film industry during the same calendar year may seek permission to apply three credits towards the Film Production degree program. A written proposal describing the project must be submitted prior to the work taking place in order to determine the appropriateness of the level and scope of the project. The School of Cinema must be satisfied that the work will be done under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time Cinema faculty member."
FMPR 447 "Professional Internship II" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the School of Cinema. A student repeating FMPR 446 for credit registers under FMPR 447."
FMPR 448 "Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: 24 credits completed in Film Production; written permission of the Department. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required. This course offers a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced research under the supervision of a full-time Cinema faculty member. A written agreement between the student and the supervisor shall clearly state the nature of the students research, the scope of the project, and the work schedule. The study workload should be equivalent to a three-credit course in the program. Independent study may not duplicate curriculum offerings."
FMPR 449 "Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: FMPR 448; 24 credits completed in Film Production; written permission of the Department. A minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5 is required. This course offers a limited number of students the opportunity to pursue advanced research under the supervision of a full-time Cinema faculty member. A written agreement between the student and the supervisor shall clearly state the nature of the students research, the scope of the project, and the work schedule. The study workload should be equivalent to a three-credit course in the program. Independent study may not duplicate curriculum offerings."
FMPR 450 "Film Production Specialization Seminar" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Film Production and written permission of the School of Cinema. A seminar offering in-depth, practical approaches to artistic and technical situations. This course brings together all students in the Specialization in Film Production."
FMPR 451 "Advanced Project Internship I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Film Production or the Major in Film Production; FMPR 332 previously or concurrently; written permission of the School of Cinema. A Film Production student who contributes in a key position to a graduate project in the Film Production MFA program may apply for credits on the understanding that the application take place prior to the production and is authorized by the faculty members responsible for both programs."
FMPR 452 "Advanced Project Internship II" "Prerequisite: FMPR 451 and written permission of the School of Cinema. A student repeating FMPR 451 for credit registers under FMPR 452."
FMPR 498 "Special Topics in Film Production" "A course for advanced students which provides an opportunity for the study of limited and more specialized aspects of film production. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
FMPR 499 "Special Topics in Film Production" "A course for advanced students which provides an opportunity for the study of limited and more specialized aspects of film production. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
FPST 201 "Introduction to First Peoples Studies" "This course introduces the guiding concepts central to First Peoples Studies at Concordia. These guiding concepts are often misunderstood by mainstream society. Themes include the Medicine Wheel as a structuring approach to course content and teaching/learning; worldviews; colonization and decolonization; First Peoples thought and knowledge; the diversity among First Peoples; and individual and community empowerment within First Peoples frames of reference. Principles and practices of dialogue and cross-cultural communication are introduced. A key process goal of the course is for students to explore, with increasing skill and knowledge, their own motivations, positioning, and goals in relation to pursuing First Peoples Studies."
FPST 202 "Research Strategies in First Peoples Studies" "This course introduces basic concepts, practices, and issues for study and research consistent with the goals of First Peoples Studies, including the historical relation of First Peoples to academic research; ethical considerations; the social construction of knowledge, the influence of First Peoples thought, knowledge, and ways of knowing on the development of relevant contemporary research; basic steps of designing, carrying out, and presenting research within several contemporary models, including participatory research; constructive relations of people of other cultures to researching in the area; qualitative and quantitative research methods, including asking research questions; and basic skills of interviewing, as well as treating, analyzing and presenting interview data, within qualitative research."
FPST 203 "First Peoples of Canada" "This course provides an introductory overview of knowledge related to the eleven cultural groups of First Peoples in Canada. It explores theories of migration, geographic location, cultural and linguistic diversity, historical socio-economic and political systems as well as the relationships with the environment and traditional practices and beliefs. In-depth focus is placed on representative nations within each group."
FPST 210 "Haudenosaunee Peoples" "This course traces the history of the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) from the period of the founding of the Confederacy to the present. With particular focus on the Kanienkehaka (Mohawk) of Quebec, it includes discussion on the culture, language, and structure of Haudenosaunee society, the formation of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy, traditional philosophies such as the Kaienerekowa (Great Law of Peace) and the Code of Handsome Lake, Kanonsesro:non (people who adhere to the ways of the Longhouse), symbolism, as well as contemporary issues, including the impact of Euro-Canadian government policies."
FPST 211 "Algonquian Peoples" "This course explores the specific cultures of the Algonquian peoples of Canada with an emphasis on the peoples of Quebec (the Abenaki, the Algonquin, the Attikamek, the Cree, the Innu, the Malecite, the Mikmaq, and the Naskapi) and in particular the Eeyouch (the Cree Nations). From a historical perspective and using a sociological approach, this course examines social and political structures, gender-defined roles, relationship with the environment, as well as spirituality and language. This course also examines changing roles and structures influenced by colonization, including the imposition of federal policies."
FPST 212 "Inuit Peoples" "This course explores the specific cultures of the Inuit peoples in Canada with a particular emphasis on the Inuit people of Nunavik (Northern Quebec). The course examines social and political structures, gender-defined roles, the Arctic way of life, the Inuit language and its dialects, as well as the spiritual beliefs of the Inuit. This course also examines changing roles and structures influenced by colonization, including the imposition of federal policies."
FPST 297 "Proseminar 1: Indigenous Ways of Knowing" "Prerequisite: Registration in the program and permission of the School. This course examines how traditional knowledge continues to maintain relevance in the modern world. Students learn, both personally and professionally, how to work with, incorporate, and record indigenous knowledge."
FPST 298 "Selected Topics in First Peoples Studies" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
FPST 301 "The Indian Act" "Prerequisite: FPST 201, 202. This course focuses on the Indian Act, with an emphasis on its impact on the First Peoples of Quebec. This includes discussion of the events leading up to its imposition, its implications for First Peoples cultures and societies, as well as related policies and other instruments of assimilation and colonization. Issues of accommodation and resistance are discussed. Effects of proposed changes to the Indian Act are analyzed and alternative solutions are explored."
FPST 302 "First Peoples and Education" "Prerequisite: FPST 201, 202. This course traces the history of the education of the First Peoples. It explores current issues in education, including educational approaches defined and implemented by First Peoples. Topics covered include traditional ways of learning and teaching. The issue of colonization, including early attempts at religious and linguistic conversion, as well as Canadas residential school system and its continuing legacy, are discussed in depth."
FPST 303 "First Peoples and Health" "Prerequisite: FPST 201, 202. This course addresses First Peoples wellness philosophies and healing approaches in dealing with contemporary health problems. It draws significantly on historical perspectives of First Peoples mental, physical, spiritual, and emotional health issues, including pre-contact health and environments, the introduction of alcohol and viral disease, as well as the emergence of lifestyle-related diseases. Some of the current health issues to be explored include structural inequalities, institutional mistreatment, addictions, diabetes, HIV/AIDS, and mental health."
FPST 306 "Contemporary First Peoples Art " "Prerequisite: FPST 201, 202. This course provides an in-depth examination of various artist traditions among First Peoples. Beginning in the post-World War II era, topics covered include historical and contemporary trends and influences in artistic production, biopics of prominent artists, and issues surrounding museum collection and arts patronage by settlers/non-autochtons. The lived experiences and realities of First Peoples will inform all topics examined in the course."
FPST 310 "Linguistic Introduction to Algonquian Languages" "This course presents a general overview of the eight Algonquian languages spoken in Quebec, with special emphasis on the Cree language. The course introduces the student to basic vocabulary, different dialects and writing systems. It explores the basic components that make up Algonquian languages, including sounds, word composition, sentence structure and meaning. Other topics include linguistic interference from dominant languages, semantic shift and the use of language as a social tool. This course assists the student to recognize and value the social and cultural context of language."
FPST 311 "Linguistic Introduction to Haudenosaunee Languages" "This course presents a general overview of the six Haudenosaunee (Iroquoian) languages, with special emphasis on Kanienkehaka (the Mohawk language). The course introduces the student to basic vocabulary, different dialects and writing systems. It explores the basic components that make up Haudenosaunee languages including sounds, word composition, sentence structure and meaning. Other topics include linguistic interference from dominant languages. This course assists the student to recognize and value the social and cultural context of language."
FPST 312 "Linguistic Introduction to Inuktitut Language" "This course presents a general overview of the Inuktitut language, with special emphasis on the dialect spoken in Nunavik (Northern Quebec). The course introduces the student to basic vocabulary, different dialects, and the syllabic writing system used by Inuit people. It explores the basic components that make up Inuktitut, including sounds, word composition, sentence structure and meaning. Other topics include linguistic interference from dominant languages. This course assists the student to recognize and value the social and cultural context of language."
FPST 320 "First Peoples and the Media" "This course explores how First Peoples have been portrayed in selected media such as television, film, and advertising by looking at different representations in various industries such as advertising, sports, and tourism. This includes discussion on the relationship between media and First Peoples including the medias impact on relations between the mainstream society and First Peoples. The social role of different forms of media as used by First Peoples in the process of empowerment is also discussed."
FPST 321 "First Peoples and Justice " "Prerequisite: FPST 301. This course focuses on the relationship between First Peoples and the Canadian justice system. It looks specifically at how the Canadian legal, judicial, and penal system has dealt with First Peoples through time. The course also explores pre-contact forms of justice, tensions between European and indigenous conceptions of justice, First Peoples response to Canadian justice, and the emergence of alternative, indigenous mechanisms of judicial administration within communities in Quebec and Canada."
FPST 322 "First Peoples and the Fur Trade " "This course provides an in-depth historical and sociological analysis of the impact of the fur trade on the First Peoples of Canada. Topics include the emergence of the fur trade, and fur-trading companies dependence on First Peoples. Special emphasis is placed on changing demographics as a result of the fur trade, the increasing reliance on European goods, First Peoples entrepreneurial spirit, the birth of the Mtis Nation, as well as the evolving political and economic role of women within fur-trading society."
FPST 323 "First Peoples Sacred Stories " "Prerequisite: FPST 201 or 203. Through storytelling, reading, discussion, and writing, this course explores themes of fundamental human concern for First Peoples. It considers oral traditions as integral to broader, culturally defined systems of knowledge and explores the role of sacred stories in traditional and contemporary societies. This includes discussion on the role of stories as vehicles for encoding and transmitting knowledge about the people, the environment, the culture and history. Stories analyzed include creation stories, trickster tales, oral historical accounts, and stories relating to natural phenomena."
FPST 341 "Globalization and Indigenous Peoples " "This course explores the situation of First Peoples across the world from a comparative indigenous perspective. The primary aim of the course is to familiarize students with the similarities and differences between indigenous cultures and nations within the context of global colonialism past and present."
FPST 397 "Proseminar 2: Ethics and First Peoples " "Prerequisite: Registration in the program and permission of the School. This course examines ethical issues pertaining to First Peoples from traditional and non-traditional perspectives. In addition to addressing community/research conflict and co-operation, concerns of insider/outsider research and cultural considerations in conducting research are also studied."
FPST 398 "Special Topics in First Peoples Studies " "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
FPST 401 "Contemporary Politics in First Peoples Communities " "Prerequisite: FPST 301. This course focuses on First Peoples politics in the Quebec and Canadian contexts. It explores more specifically the emergence and actions of First Peoples political organizations over the past 40 years, First Peoples relationships with successive federal and provincial governments, movements of national self-affirmation, and the nature of the political interface between competing groups inside First Peoples communities."
FPST 402 "First Peoples Contemporary Social Issues " "Prerequisite: FPST 302, 303. This course addresses contemporary social issues and challenges faced by First Peoples. It analyzes the underlying causes of issues such as poverty, lack of formal education, isolation, alcohol and substance abuse, family violence and sexual abuse. The course also examines current healing approaches and programs used to deal with these issues, and fosters discussion on possible alternatives."
FPST 406 "Decolonizing First Peoples Art " "Prerequisite: FPST 306. This course examines First Peoples artistic contributions within the context of decolonizing indigenous art globally. Topics explored highlight the relationship between culture, society, politics and visual art that illustrate art as part of the anticolonial resistance by First Peoples as well as the role of museums and exhibitions in fictioning national identities."
FPST 410 "First Peoples Community Development " "Prerequisite: FPST 401 previously or concurrently. This course examines the concepts and experiences of community development among First Peoples, with an emphasis on Quebec. Selected community development models, their goals, processes, and means of evaluation, are analyzed. The course introduces students to analytical and practical skills in context-sensitive community development guided by First Peoples thought and knowledge. Students explore dynamics of nourishing community participation and leadership, as well as analyze community structures and inter-group relations within communities. Reference is made to on-reserve, urban, rural, and northern contexts. Ethical considerations are discussed. This course includes analysis of case studies."
FPST 411 "First Peoples Treaties and Agreements " "Prerequisite: FPST 401 previously or concurrently. This course explores the contemporary issues associated with treaties and indigenous land claims agreements. Emphasis is placed on selected historically significant treaties between the First Peoples, and those between the First Peoples and the Europeans. The original intent and framework of treaties and agreements, the negotiation processes involved, and the implementation of treaties and modern agreements are also discussed."
FPST 412 "First Peoples and Governance " "Prerequisite: FPST 401 previously or concurrently. This course examines the political and administrative mechanisms which First Peoples use to arbitrate competing interests, manage conflict, and formulate policies in their communities across Quebec and Canada. The course analyzes political and administrative institutions inherited from the Indian Act, as well as governance strategies developed in conformity with First Peoples traditions and in resistance to the Canadian states institutional dominion. The course also explores the tensions created by the coexistence of European and indigenous modes of governance within and outside First Peoples communities."
FPST 413 "First Peoples International Relations and Diplomacy " "Prerequisite: FPST 321. This course focuses on the actions and interventions of various First Peoples on the international scene, both in the past and in the present. The courses primary aim is to explore the reasons why First Peoples have resorted to international forums and institutions, how they conduct their international action and whether in the end international diplomacy works to their advantage."
FPST 414 "First Peoples Rights Movements " "Prerequisite: FPST 401 and 402, previously or concurrently. This course focuses on the many historical and contemporary forms of First Peoples resistance to colonization, including violent and non-violent resistance, revitalization movements and self-determination. It explores liberation theory and its roots in colonial oppression and analyzes historical and contemporary resistance movements such as the confrontation at Kanehsatake (Oka) and Esgenoopetitj (Burnt Church) and the movement for decolonization through self-determination."
FPST 415 "Indigenous Identity and Nationalism " "Prerequisite: FPST 401 previously or concurrently. This course explores the political and ideological ramifications of the expression of indigenous identity. It focuses on the emergence of First Peoples nationalist movements, compares them with non-Aboriginal nationalisms, and examines the nature and conceptual foundations of the indigenous sense of nation. Attention is devoted to the political efficiency of indigenous nationalism in its interface with the Canadian and Quebec states. Case studies particularly emphasize Kanienkehaka and Eeyou nationalisms."
FPST 490 "Aboriginal Community Economic Development I " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the major; 60 credits and permission of the School. This course assists participants in exploring specific issues related to Aboriginal economic development in particular settings (in reserve, urban, rural, and northern communities), as well as addressing challenges common to Aboriginal CED. It assists participants in exploring historical and contemporary relationships between Aboriginal communities and the predominant cultural and economic forces, and comparing traditional Aboriginal organizational and economic practices with the new approaches being proposed by CED."
FPST 491 "Aboriginal Community Economic Development II " "Prerequisite: FPST 490. This course uses a case study approach to evaluate one or more economic development strategies applied within an Aboriginal community. An historical overview of this experience outlines the cultural and political context which has shaped these strategies as well as their results. CED approaches are examined in the context of this individual experience. This course may include on-site visits and guest lecturers."
FPST 497 "Proseminar 3: Oral Traditions as Methodology " "Prerequisite: Registration in the program and permission of the School. This course explores the validity and importance of oral traditions as a way to comprehend First Peoples knowledge and its continued relevance in the modern world."
FPST 498 "Advanced Topics in First Peoples Studies " "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
FRAA 415 "Franais avanc I" "Pralable : FRAA 410. Ce cours est destin  ltudiante ou  ltudiant qui souhaite, tant  lcrit qu loral, dvelopper une argumentation structure et cohrente, mettre en uvre des outils dorganisation, darticulation et de cohsion du discours. Il vise  permettre  ltudiante ou  ltudiant denrichir ses connaissances grammaticales et culturelles, de sexprimer efficacement, dargumenter de faon claire, de comprendre un large ventail de textes et discours longs ainsi que leur signification implicite."
FRAA 416 "Franais avanc II" "Pralable : FRAA 415. Ce cours constitue la suite du FRAA 415, franais avanc I. Il est destin  ltudiante ou  ltudiant qui souhaite, tant  lcrit qu loral, dvelopper une argumentation structure et cohrente, mettre en uvre des outils dorganisation, darticulation et de cohsion du discours. Il vise  permettre  ltudiante ou  ltudiant denrichir ses connaissances grammaticales et culturelles, de sexprimer efficacement, dargumenter de faon claire, de comprendre un large ventail de textes et discours longs ainsi que leur signification implicite."
FRAN 211 "French Language: Elementary" "This course is restricted to students having no previous training in French. It includes a comprehensive introduction to the basic structures and vocabulary of French and should enable students to acquire an ability to speak and understand simple conversational French. Both oral and written aspects of the language are presented, with special emphasis on oral skills."
FRAN 212 "French Language: Transitional Level" "Prerequisite: FRAN 211 or equivalent. The aim of this course is to provide students who have studied either one year of French at the university or post-secondary level, or two years of French at the secondary level or equivalent, with an opportunity to improve their levels of comprehension and expression so that they will be able to communicate with greater ease in written and oral French. Students will expand their repertory of linguistic structures and vocabulary through in-class directed conversation groups, homework, oral lab, and written exercises."
FRAN 213 "Langue franaise : niveaux intermdiaires I et II" "Pralable : FRAN 212 ou lquivalent. Ce cours sadresse aux tudiantes et tudiants ayant suivi soit quatre ans de franais  lcole secondaire, soit deux ans de franais au niveau collgial, soit 12 crdits de franais  luniversit, ou lquivalent. Par un apprentissage et approfondissement de mcanismes grammaticaux, du vocabulaire, de techniques de comprhension et production crites et orales, ltudiant sera amen  dvelopper les comptences ncessaires pour communiquer avec aisance en franais."
FRAN 214 "Langue franaise : niveau intermdiaire I" "Pralable : FRAN 212 ou lquivalent. Ce cours sadresse aux tudiantes et tudiants ayant suivi soit quatre ans de franais  lcole secondaire, soit deux ans de franais au niveau collgial, soit 12 crdits de franais  luniversit, ou lquivalent. Par un apprentissage et approfondissement de mcanismes grammaticaux, du vocabulaire, de techniques de comprhension et production crites et orales, ltudiant sera amen  dvelopper les comptences ncessaires pour communiquer avec aisance en franais."
FRAN 215 "Langue franaise : niveau intermdiaire II" "Pralable : FRAN 214 ou lquivalent. Ce cours est la suite du FRAN 214. Il vise  donner  ltudiant une plus grande aisance dans son utilisation du franais oral et crit. Les travaux prendront la forme dexercices varis de grammaire, de vocabulaire, de comprhension et production de textes crits, et dinteraction orale."
FRAN 218 "Initiation au franais oral" "Pralable : FRAN 213 ou lquivalent. Ce cours de niveau intermdiaire sadresse  des tudiantes et  des tudiants qui ont une connaissance de base du franais et qui dsirent renforcer leur comptence en communication orale. Une dmarche combinant comprhension auditive et expression orale permettra de dvelopper aussi bien les habilets  comprendre la langue parle que laisance  prendre la parole."
FRAN 219 "Initiation au franais crit" "Pralable : FRAN 213 ou lquivalent. Ce cours de niveau intermdiaire sadresse  des tudiantes et tudiants qui ont une bonne comptence en communication orale en franais et qui dsirent renforcer leur comptence en communication crite. Il a principalement pour objectif damener les tudiantes et les tudiants  consolider leurs connaissances de la structure de la phrase de base et de ses transformations, et  enrichir leur vocabulaire. Les tudiantes et les tudiants seront galement initis  la composition de textes divers et  deux techniques dexpression : le plan et le rsum."
FRAN 221 "Correction phontique" "Pralable : FRAN 212 ou lquivalent. Ce cours sadresse  des tudiantes et des tudiants dont la langue maternelle nest pas le franais et qui souhaitent amliorer leur prononciation. Une approche systmatique, qui combine des activits de perception et darticulation allant des sons isols  la phrase, leur permettra dacqurir et de mettre en pratique les rgles de la phontique franaise (prononciation, liaison, intonation)."
FRAN 298 "tude dun sujet particulier" "Les pralables de ces cours, ainsi que les sujets particuliers qui y sont tudis, sont indiqus dans le"
FRAN 301 "Langue franaise : niveaux dapprofondissement I et II" "Pralable : FRAN 213 ou 215 ou lquivalent. Ce cours dapprofondissement est destin aux tudiantes et tudiants qui possdent dj une bonne connaissance du franais mais qui ont besoin damliorer leur expression crite et orale. Le cours est essentielle-ment ax sur la pratique de la lecture, sur la comprhension de textes et de documents audiovisuels, ainsi que sur la pratique de la grammaire et de la rdaction."
FRAN 302 "Langue franaise : niveau dapprofondissement I" "Pralable : FRAN 213 ou 215 ou lquivalent. Ce cours de franais, niveau dapprofondissement I, est destin aux tudiantes et tudiants qui possdent dj une bonne connaissance du franais mais qui ont besoin damliorer leur expression orale et crite. Le cours est essentiellement ax sur la pratique de la lecture, sur la comprhension de textes et de documents audiovisuels, ainsi que sur la pratique de la grammaire et de la rdaction."
FRAN 303 "Langue franaise : niveau dapprofondissement II" "Pralable : FRAN 302 ou lquivalent. Ce cours de franais, niveau dapprofondissement II, est destin aux tudiantes et tudiants qui possdent dj une bonne connaissance du franais mais qui ont besoin damliorer leur expression crite et orale. Le cours est essentiellement ax sur la pratique de la grammaire et de la rdaction."
FRAN 304 "Langue franaise : niveau dapprofondissement III" "Pralable : FRAN 301 ou 303. Ce cours de franais, niveau dapprofondissement III, est destin aux tudiantes et tudiants qui possdent dj une bonne connaissance du franais, mais qui ont besoin dapprofondir leur expression crite et orale."
FRAN 305 "Communication orale" "Pralable : FRAN 301 ou 303 ou lquivalent. Ce cours sadresse  des tudiantes et des tudiants non francophones qui souhaitent amliorer les aptitudes ncessaires  une communication orale efficace en franais. Des prsentations thoriques et des activits pratiques exploitant des situations de communication varies leur permettront dacqurir une plus grande aisance et de mieux organiser leur discours. Des activits dcoute bases sur des documents authentiques leur permettront daugmenter leur capacit de comprhension en franais."
FRAN 306 "Communication crite" "Pralable : FRAN 301, 303 ou lquivalent. Acquisition des techniques ncessaires  la rdaction. tude des diffrents styles de langue crite par opposition  ceux de la langue parle. Pratique de lanalyse et du commentaire de texte."
FRAN 315 "Correction phontique (niveau avanc)" "Pralable : FRAN 221, 301, 303 ou lquivalent. Ce cours sadresse  ltudiante ou ltudiant qui peut sexprimer clairement du point de vue phontique et qui dsire acqurir une performance en prononciation. Le cours est essentiellement ax sur les particularits prosodiques et phontiques du franais. Une importance est galement accorde  lintonation expressive."
FRAN 318 "Le franais des affaires" "Pralable : FRAN 306 ou lquivalent. Ce cours vise  faire acqurir des comptences ncessaires  une communication crite et orale efficace dans des situations complexes du march du travail. Les tudiantes et tudiants seront amens  analyser et  rdiger divers documents administratifs (lettres, procs-verbaux, comptes rendus) ainsi qu communiquer oralement avec aisance dans le milieu des affaires. Lapprofondissement des notions linguistiques et lexploitation dun vocabulaire relatif  la langue des affaires font aussi partie des objectifs du cours."
FRAN 320 "Le vocabulaire franais" "Pralable : FRAN 303 ou lquivalent. Ce cours propose une prsentation mthodique des divers aspects du vocabulaire franais. Il comporte quatre parties : introduction gnrale et prsentation des outils bibliographiques; origine et volution des mots; procds de cration lexicale; variation smantique. Les travaux prendront la forme dexercices varis de vocabulaire, danalyses de textes et de recherches lexicales."
FRAN 321 "Grammaire fonctionnelle du franais" "Pralable : FRAN 304 ou 306; ou lquivalent. Ce cours de mise  niveau sadresse  ltudiante ou ltudiant qui, possdant dj des connaissances approfondies en franais, veut dvelopper des automatismes de correction adapts aux diffrents types de communication. Ax sur la comprhension et lexpression crite et orale, il permettra  ltudiante ou  ltudiant datteindre une meilleure utilisation de la langue franaise."
FRAN 398 "tude dun sujet particulier" "Les pralables de ces cours, ainsi que les sujets particuliers qui y sont tudis, sont indiqus dans le"
FLIT 222 "Introduction  la littrature et  la culture franaises" "Pralable : FRAN 301 ou 303 ou lquivalent. Introduction  la littrature et  la culture franaises et  leurs spcificits historiques, sociales et linguistiques par la lecture et ltude de quelques uvres reprsentatives."
FLIT 232 "Introduction  la littrature et  la culture qubcoises" "Pralable : FRAN 301 ou 303 ou lquivalent. Introduction  la littrature et  la culture qubcoises et  leurs spcificits historiques, sociales et linguistiques par la lecture et ltude de quelques uvres reprsentatives."
FLIT 240 "Introduction aux littratures et aux cultures de la Francophonie" "Pralable : FRAN 301 ou 303 ou lquivalent. Introduction aux littratures et aux cultures de la francophonie et  leurs spcificits historiques, sociales et linguistiques par la lecture et ltude de quelques uvres reprsentatives."
FLIT 250 "Introduction aux cultures populaires de langue franaise" "Pralable : FRAN 301 ou 303 ou lquivalent. Introduction aux cultures populaires de langue franaise (littrature, cinma, tlvision, chanson) et  leurs spcificits historiques, sociales et linguistiques par la lecture et ltude de quelques uvres reprsentatives."
FLIT 300 "Littrature et culture franaises du Moyen ge au XVII<sup>e</sup>sicle" "Aperu gnral de la littrature franaise du Moyen ge, de la Renaissance et du XVII<sup>e</sup>sicle, et des contextes historiques, sociaux et culturels qui permettent de mieux comprendre les uvres."
FLIT 302 "Littrature et culture franaises du XVIII<sup>e</sup>sicle  aujourdhui" "Aperu gnral de la littrature franaise du XVIII<sup>e</sup>sicle  aujourdhui et des contextes historiques, sociaux et culturels qui permettent de mieux comprendre les uvres."
FLIT 305 "Littrature et culture qubcoises" "Aperu gnral de la littrature qubcoise du dbut du XX<sup>e</sup>sicle  aujourdhui et des contextes historiques, sociaux et culturels qui permettent de mieux comprendre les uvres."
FLIT 308 "Littratures et cultures de la Francophonie" "Aperu gnral des littratures francophones dAfrique, du Maghreb et de la Carabe, et des contextes historiques, sociaux et culturels qui permettent de mieux comprendre les uvres."
FLIT 310 "Littrature franaise du Moyen ge" "tude de la littrature du Moyen ge (chanson de geste, courtoisie, satire, lyrisme), de son contexte et de ses principales thmatiques."
FLIT 312 "Littrature franaise de la Renaissance" "tude de la littrature du XVI<sup>e</sup>sicle (humanisme, potes de la Pliade), de son contexte et de ses principales thmatiques."
FLIT 314 "Littrature franaise du XVII<sup>e</sup>sicle" "tude de la littrature du XVII<sup>e</sup>sicle (baroque, classicisme), de son contexte et de ses principales thmatiques."
FLIT 316 "Littrature franaise du XVIII<sup>e</sup>sicle" "tude de la littrature du XVIIIe sicle (Lumires, libertinage), de son contexte et de ses principales thmatiques."
FLIT 318 "Littrature franaise du XIX<sup>e</sup>sicle I" "tude des principaux courants de la premire moiti du XIXe sicle (romantisme, ralisme) et de leurs principales thmatiques telles que le lyrisme et les transformations sociales."
FLIT 319 "Littrature franaise du XIX<sup>e</sup>sicle II" "tude des principaux courants de la seconde moiti du XIX<sup>e</sup>sicle (ralisme, Parnasse, naturalisme, dcadence, symbolisme) et de leurs principales thmatiques telles que le progrs, la question sociale et le statut de la littrature."
FLIT 320 "Littrature franaise du XX<sup>e</sup>sicle I" "tude des principaux courants de la premire moiti du XX<sup>e</sup>sicle (surralisme, existentialisme, absurde) et de leurs principales thmatiques telles que linconscient, la guerre, les extrmes politiques et le relativisme philosophique."
FLIT 321 "Littrature franaise du XX<sup>e</sup>sicle II" "tude des principaux courants de la seconde moiti du XX<sup>e</sup>sicle (absurde, nouveau roman, Oulipo) et de leurs principales thmatiques telles que le souvenir de lOccupation, la socit de consommation, la libralisation des murs et la rvolte de la jeunesse."
FLIT 324 "Littrature franaise contemporaine" "tude des principaux courants contemporains (retour au ralisme, postmodernisme, autofiction) et de leurs principales thmatiques telles que le nolibralisme, le multiculturalisme, linfluence du numrique et la conscience historique."
FLIT 339 "Littrature qubcoise avant 1900" "tude de la littrature de la fondation de la Nouvelle-France  la fin du XIX<sup>e</sup>sicle (crits coloniaux, contes et lgendes, roman historique, roman de colonisation, posie patriotique), de son contexte et de ses principales thmatiques."
FLIT 341 "Littrature qubcoise de 1900  1960" "tude des principaux courants de 1900  1960 (terroir, ralisme, roman psychologique) et de leurs principales thmatiques telles que la survivance, lurbanisation et la qute identitaire."
FLIT 343 "Littrature qubcoise de 1960  1980" "tude des principaux courants de 1960  1980 (nouveau roman, contreculture, criture migrante) et de leurs principales thmatiques telles que lidentit nationale et linguistique, la modernit, le fminisme."
FLIT 345 "Littrature qubcoise de 1980  aujourdhui" "tude des principaux courants depuis 1980 (criture migrante, postmodernisme, autofiction, no-terroir) et de leurs principales thmatiques telles que le dsenchantement, lamricanit, lhyperconsommation et le multiculturalisme."
FLIT 351 "Thtre qubcois" "tude du thtre moderne et contemporain, de ses thories, de ses pratiques et des principaux axes de son dveloppement comme le thtre populaire, le ralisme, la critique sociale, les exprimentations formelles et lautorflexivit."
FLIT 362 "Littratures du Maghreb" "tude duvres francophones significatives de lAlgrie, de la Tunisie et du Maroc en contexte colonial (interrogations identitaires, gnration 54, revue souffles) et aprs les Indpendances (interrogations sociales, engagement et contestation politiques), de la littrature beure  la littrature-monde."
FLIT 363 "Littratures dAfrique francophone" "tude duvres significatives de quelques pays dAfrique subsaharienne francophone en contexte colonial (la ngritude) et postcolonial, des Indpendances  nos jours, du roman de la dictature au roman de la migritude."
FLIT 365 "Littratures de la Carabe francophone" "tude duvres significatives de la Guadeloupe, de la Martinique, de la Guyane, des courants littraires auxquels elles appartiennent (ngritude, antillanit, crolit, Tout-monde) et des enjeux contemporains de la cration littraire caribenne."
FLIT 367 "Littrature dHati" "tude duvres significatives dHati de lindpendance  nos jours et de courants littraires comme le romantisme hatien, lindignisme, le mouvement de La Nouvelle Ronde, la ngritude et la littrature de la diaspora."
FLIT 371 "Littrature des femmes en France" "tude duvres franaises de diverses poques crites par des femmes et de leurs principales thmatiques telles que laffirmation identitaire, le rapport au social, le corps et le fminisme."
FLIT 373 "Littrature des femmes au Qubec" "tude duvres qubcoises de diverses poques crites par des femmes et de leurs principales thmatiques telles que laffirmation identitaire, le rapport au social, le corps et le fminisme."
FLIT 375 "Littrature des femmes de la Francophonie" "tude duvres de diffrents pays francophones du sud crites par des femmes et de leurs principales thmatiques lies  diffrents contextes culturels, historiques et idologiques, de la colonisation  la dcolonisation, du fminisme au"
FLIT 398 "tude dun sujet particulier" "tude dun sujet particulier dans le domaine des littratures de langue franaise. Le contenu spcifique du cours est indiqu dans le Undergraduate Class Schedule."
FLIT 402 "Littrature et culture populaires de la France" "Analyse duvres reprsentatives de la littrature et de la culture populaires de la France (par exemple, roman, thtre, cinma, tlvision, chanson) et examen de leurs spcificits historiques, sociales et linguistiques."
FLIT 404 "Littrature et culture populaires du Qubec" "Analyse duvres reprsentatives de la littrature et de la culture populaires du Qubec (par exemple, roman, thtre, cinma, tlvision, chanson) et examen de leurs spcificits historiques, sociales et linguistiques."
FLIT 406 "Littratures et cultures populaires de la Francophonie" "Analyse duvres reprsentatives des littratures et des cultures populaires de la Francophonie (par exemple, roman, thtre, cinma, tlvision, chanson) et examen de leurs spcificits historiques, sociales et linguistiques."
FLIT 411 "La bande dessine" "Analyse duvres de bande dessine et de roman graphique en franais et tude des diffrents concepts qui permettent de thoriser les rapports entre texte et image (narration, scnarisation, ancrage, relais)."
FLIT 413 "Le roman policier franais" "Analyse duvres reprsentatives de la tradition du roman policier franais (roman  nigme, roman noir, roman  suspense, no-polar, polar contemporain) et examen de leurs spcificits historiques, sociales et linguistiques."
FLIT 415 "Les critures scniques" "Analyse de formes mergentes et de stratgies dramaturgiques significatives des arts de la scne (thtre, danse-thtre, performance, cirque contemporain) visant  mettre en vidence ce qui scrit sur scne par la parole, le geste, limage et la performance."
FLIT 431 "Littratures coloniales" "Analyse duvres littraires francophones (Maghreb, Afrique subsaharienne) de la fin du XIX<sup>e</sup>sicle aux annes 1960, situation des enjeux politiques, historiques, sociaux et culturels quelles abordent, et examen de textes-cls des principaux penseurs et des mouvements anticoloniaux."
FLIT 433 "Littratures postcoloniales" "Analyse duvres littraires francophones (Maghreb, Afrique subsaharienne) des Indpendances africaines  nos jours, situation des enjeux politiques, historiques, sociaux et culturels quelles abordent, et examen de textes-cls des thories postcoloniales."
FLIT 447 "Les voix de Montral" "Analyse duvres littraires qui ont pour sujet la ville de Montral, son histoire, son prsent, ses quartiers, ses habitants, ses langues, ses cultures, son ambiance et sa diversit, afin de mieux comprendre les reprsentations qui la caractrisent."
FLIT 449 "Littrature qubcoise  Canadian Literature" "Analyse compare duvres significatives des littratures qubcoise et canadienne-anglaise visant  mettre en vidence leurs similitudes et leurs traits distinctifs  la lumire des contextes historiques, sociaux et culturels."
FLIT 464 "Littratures mondiales" "Analyse duvres significatives de la littrature-monde, en traduction franaise, qui ont eu un impact hors de leur contexte dorigine et qui refltent des interrogations contemporaines."
FLIT 466 "Littratures des Amriques" "Analyse duvres littraires des Amriques (Canada, tats-Unis, Amrique latine), en franais ou en traduction franaise, visant  mettre en vidence des enjeux lis  lamricanit,  la transculturalit et  lhybridation."
FLIT 468 "Littratures autochtones" "Analyse duvres significatives des littratures autochtones en franais ou en traduction franaise et examen des enjeux culturels, historiques, sociaux et linguistiques quelles mettent en vidence."
FLIT 470 "Littrature et cinma" "Analyse duvres littraires en franais et de leur adaptation cinmatographique, selon les caractristiques respectives de lexpression crite et du langage filmique, afin de comprendre la nature et les effets de la transposition."
FLIT 473 "Littrature et numrique" "Analyse duvres littraires en franais ou en traduction franaise, parues sous la forme de livre ou de dispositif hypermdiatique, qui tmoignent des changements que le numrique entrane dans les pratiques dcriture et de lecture."
FLIT 476 "Littrature et musique" "Analyse duvres littraires en franais ayant la musique pour sujet, afin de comprendre la reprsentation thmatique dun univers musical (rpertoire, sous-culture) et la transposition verbale dun phnomne sonore."
FLIT 478 "Littrature et gastronomie" "Analyse duvres littraires en franais qui ont pour sujet lalimentation (production, cuisine, consommation, rituels),  laide de notions lies au domaine des tudes gastronomiques ("
FLIT 486 "Cration littraire I" "Introduction aux pratiques et aux exigences de la cration littraire (forme, ton, rythme, lexique) par le biais de lectures et dateliers dcriture."
FLIT 488 "Cration littraire II" "Pralable : FRAA 440 ou FLIT 486 ou lquivalent. Approfondissement des pratiques et des exigences de la cration littraire (forme, ton, rythme, lexique) par le biais de lectures et dateliers dcriture ainsi que par llaboration dun projet individuel."
FLIT 494 "Tutorat en littrature" "Pralables : 12 crdits en littrature et autorisation du dpartement. tude individuelle dirige dun sujet particulier dans le domaine des littratures de langue franaise."
FLIT 495 "Tutorat en littrature" "Pralables : 12 crdits en littrature et autorisation du dpartement. tude individuelle dirige dun sujet particulier dans le domaine des littratures de langue franaise."
FLIT 496 "Recherche dirige" "Pralables : 12 crdits dans la spcialit et autorisation du dpartement. Cours offert uniquement aux tudiantes et tudiants des programmes de majeure et de spcialisation en littratures de langue franaise. tude individuelle dirige permettant dapprofondir un sujet particulier dans le domaine des littratures de langue franaise."
FLIT 498 "tude dun sujet particulier" "tude dun sujet particulier dans le domaine des littratures de langue franaise. Le contenu spcifique du cours est indiqu dans le Undergraduate Class Schedule."
FTRA 200 "Mthodologie de la traduction" "Pralables : ENGL 207 et FRAN 306 ou quivalent. Ce cours a pour but dinitier ltudiante et ltudiant aux problmes de la traduction. Il sera une introduction gnrale aux diffrentes approches du texte  traduire : analyse du discours, grammaire contrastive, stylistique compare, terminologie et recherche documentaire."
FTRA 201 "Traduction gnrale du franais  langlais I" "Pralable : FTRA 200. Traduction du franais  langlais de textes gnraux et analyse des problmes lis au transfert linguistique. (A)"
FTRA 202 "Traduction gnrale de langlais au franais I" "Pralable : FTRA 200. Traduction de langlais au franais de textes gnraux et analyse des problmes lis au transfert linguistique. (F)"
FTRA 203 "Langlais en contact avec le franais au Qubec" "Ce cours sadresse aux tudiantes et tudiants anglophones en traduction, langue, littrature et rdaction. Il les sensibilisera aux problmes lis au contact de langlais avec le franais au Qubec et leur permettra de corriger leurs propres erreurs de faon systmatique. Le cours est ax sur la langue crite et on travaillera uniquement sur des textes journalistiques."
FTRA 204 "Le franais en contact avec langlais au Qubec" "Ce cours sadresse aux tudiantes et tudiants francophones en traduction, langue, littrature et rdaction. Il les sensibilisera aux problmes lis au contact du franais avec langlais au Qubec et leur permettra de corriger leurs propres erreurs de faon systmatique. Le cours est ax sur la langue crite et on travaillera uniquement sur des textes journalistiques."
FTRA 207 "Traduction gnrale du franais  langlais II" "Pralable : FTRA 200. Ce cours sadresse aux tudiantes et tudiants anglophones et porte sur la traduction du franais  langlais de textes gnraux, et sur lanalyse des problmes lis au transfert linguistique. (A)"
FTRA 208 "Traduction gnrale de langlais au franais II" "Pralable : FTRA 200. Ce cours sadresse aux tudiantes et tudiants francophones et porte sur la traduction de langlais au franais de textes gnraux, et sur lanalyse des problmes lis au transfert linguistique. (F)"
FTRA 298 "tude dun sujet particulier" ""
FTRA 299 "tude dun sujet particulier" "Les pralables de ces cours, ainsi que les sujets particuliers qui y sont tudis, sont indiqus dans le"
FTRA 301 "Traduction littraire du franais  langlais" "Pralable : FTRA 201. Sensibilisation aux problmes spcifiques  la traduction littraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres varis. (A)"
FTRA 304 "Traduction littraire de langlais au franais" "Pralable : FTRA 202. Sensibilisation aux problmes spcifiques  la traduction littraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres varis. (F)"
FTRA 305 "Initiation  la traduction conomique du franais  langlais" "Pralable : FTRA 207. Sensibilisation aux problmes que pose dans le domaine de lconomie la traduction du franais  langlais. (A)"
FTRA 306 "Initiation  la traduction conomique de langlais au franais" "Pralable : FTRA 208. Sensibilisation aux problmes que pose dans le domaine de lconomie la traduction de langlais au franais. (F)"
FTRA 310 "Initiation  la recherche documentaire et terminologique" "Pralable : FTRA 201 ou 202. Le cours fournit les outils permettant de reprer les problmes de terminologie en traduction. Sont traits : les cheminements documentaire et terminologique (terminologie bilingue ou unilingue, langues de spcialits); la cration de produits terminographiques (surtout thmatiques); lintervention linguistique et ses modalits (perspective sociolinguistique). (F/A)"
FTRA 398 "tude dun sujet particulier" ""
FTRA 399 "tude dun sujet particulier" "Les pralables de ces cours, ainsi que les sujets particuliers qui y sont tudis, sont indiqus dans le"
FTRA 401 "Traduction littraire avance : du franais  langlais" "Pralable : FTRA 301. tude des diffrents principes et des diffrentes techniques de la traduction littraire; aperu de la traduction littraire au Canada. Travaux pratiques : analyse critique et comparaison de traductions et de leur original; traduction de textes franais. (A)"
FTRA 402 "Traduction littraire avance : de langlais au franais" "Pralable : FTRA 304. tude des diffrents principes et des diffrentes techniques de la traduction littraire; aperu de la traduction littraire au Canada. Travaux pratiques : analyse critique et comparaison de traductions et de leur original; traduction de textes anglais. (F)"
FTRA 403 "Traduction scientifique et technique du franais  langlais" "Pralable : FTRA 201. Initiation aux diffrents problmes de la traduction dans les langues de spcialits scientifiques et techniques (franais-anglais). Le cours est divis en plusieurs parties, chaque partie correspondant  un domaine spcialis en traduction. (A)"
FTRA 404 "Traduction scientifique et technique de langlais au franais" "Pralable : FTRA 202. Initiation aux diffrents problmes de la traduction dans les langues de spcialits scientifiques et techniques (anglais-franais). Le cours est divis en plusieurs parties, chaque partie correspondant  un domaine spcialis en traduction. (F)"
FTRA 405 "Traduction commerciale et juridique du franais  langlais" "Pralable : FTRA 201. Initiation aux diffrents problmes de la traduction dans les langues de spcialits de ladministration, du commerce et du droit (franais-anglais). Le cours est divis en plusieurs parties, chaque partie correspondant  un domaine spcialis en traduction. (A)"
FTRA 406 "Traduction commerciale et juridique de langlais au franais" "Pralable : FTRA 202. Initiation aux diffrents problmes de la traduction dans les langues de spcialits de ladministration, du commerce et du droit (anglais-franais). Le cours est divis en plusieurs parties, chaque partie correspondant  un domaine spcialis. (F)"
FTRA 408 "Adaptation publicitaire" "Pralable : FTRA 301 ou 305, 304 ou 306. Initiation  ladaptation de textes publicitaires.  partir dexemples emprunts  la publicit crite, radiophonique ou tlvise, les tudiantes et tudiants seront amens  se familiariser avec les problmes linguistiques, affectifs et sociaux soulevs par le travail dadaptation. (F/A)"
FTRA 409 "Rvision et correction en traduction" "Pralable : FTRA 301 ou 305. Ce cours abordera les diffrentes mthodes de rvision et de correction de textes rdigs ou traduits en anglais; il sensibilisera les tudiantes et tudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du mtier de rviseure et rviseur; on touchera aussi aux problmes de lvaluation de la qualit des traductions. (A)"
FTRA 410 "Rvision et correction en traduction" "Pralable : FTRA 304 ou 306. Ce cours abordera les diffrentes mthodes de rvision et de correction de textes rdigs ou traduits en franais; il sensibilisera les tudiantes et tudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du mtier de rviseure et rviseur; on touchera aussi aux problmes de lvaluation de la qualit des traductions. (F)"
FTRA 411 "Terminologie et mondialisation" "Pralable : FTRA 310. Le cours porte sur certains points fins en terminologie et en terminographie modernes : synonymie, marques sociolinguistiques, nonymie, normalisation et internationalisation. Il traite spcifiquement du rle de la terminologie dans la gestion de linformation unilingue et multilingue dans les entreprises et dans les organismes nationaux et internationaux. Laspect pratique prend, entre autres, la forme de rdaction de rapports de recherche et lutilisation doutils terminotiques. (F/A)"
FTRA 412 "Thories de la traduction" "Pralable : FTRA 301 ou 304 ou 305 ou 306. Ce cours est une initiation aux diffrentes thories actuelles de la traduction. Est examin lapport de secteurs disciplinaires cls tels que la linguistique, la smiotique, la sociocritique, dans le dveloppement de la traductologie moderne. (F/A)"
FTRA 414 "Histoire de la traduction" "Pralable : FTRA 301 ou 304 ou 305 ou 306. Cours dinitiation  lhistoire de la traduction o sont traits les grands courants de la traduction depuis lAntiquit classique. Sera galement aborde la traduction dans certaines socits non occidentales. On procdera par thmes et par aires gographiques en mettant laccent sur les poques cls de grands changements politiques et culturels. (F/A)"
FTRA 416 "Informatique et traduction" "Pralables : FTRA 201 ou 202, et connaissance du traitement de textes. Ce cours porte sur la langue de linformatique, la thorie et les concepts fondamentaux qui sy rapportent. Il comporte des exercices de traduction, et une initiation aux outils informatiss pour les traducteurs : Internet, bases de donnes, systmes de traduction assiste, utilitaires. (F/A)"
FTRA 418 "Web, technologies, traduction : thories et critiques" "Pralable : FTRA 412 ou 414. Ce cours pose une rflexion thorique sur les pratiques contemporaines issues du contexte de la mondialisation par rapport aux technologies, au Web multilingue et  la traduction. Sont examins les aspects et les enjeux culturels, sociaux, linguistiques, scientifiques, techniques, philosophiques, institutionnels, politiques et idologiques. Le cours comporte des discussions hebdomadaires et un travail approfondi de recherche sur lanalyse des courants actuels des technologies et du Web en mettant laccent sur la traduction et la communication mondiale."
FTRA 420 "Stage de formation : de langlais au franais" "Pralables : 60 crdits en traduction et autorisation de la coordinatrice ou du coordinateur des stages. Le stage a pour but dinitier ltudiante ou ltudiant  lactivit professionnelle dans le domaine de la traduction de langlais au franais et de lui faire connatre le monde du travail. (Le dpartement fera tout son possible pour faciliter lobtention dun stage mais ne peut sengager  trouver un stage pour toutes les candidates et tous les candidats.) (F)"
FTRA 421 "Stage de formation : du franais  langlais" "Pralables : 60 crdits en traduction et autorisation de la coordinatrice ou du coordinateur des stages. Le stage a pour but dinitier ltudiante ou ltudiant  lactivit professionnelle dans le domaine de la traduction du franais  langlais et de lui faire connatre le monde du travail. (Le dpartement fera tout son possible pour faciliter lobtention dun stage mais ne peut sengager  trouver un stage pour toutes les candidates et tous les candidats.) (A)"
FTRA 422 "Stage de formation : de langlais au franais I" "Pralables : 60 crdits en traduction et autorisation de la coordinatrice ou du coordinateur des stages. Le stage a pour but dinitier ltudiante ou ltudiant  lactivit professionnelle dans le domaine de la traduction de langlais au franais et de lui faire connatre le monde du travail. (Le dpartement fera tout son possible pour faciliter lobtention dun stage mais ne peut sengager  trouver un stage pour toutes les candidates et candidats.) (F)"
FTRA 423 "Stage de formation : du franais  langlais I" "Pralables : 60 crdits en traduction et autorisation de la coordinatrice ou du coordinateur des stages. Le stage a pour but dinitier ltudiante ou ltudiant  lactivit professionnelle dans le domaine de la traduction du franais  langlais et de lui faire connatre le monde du travail. (Le dpartement fera tout son possible pour faciliter lobtention dun stage mais ne peut sengager  trouver un stage pour toutes les candidates et candidats.) (A)"
FTRA 424 "Stage de formation : de langlais au franais II" "Pralables : 60 crdits en traduction et autorisation de la coordinatrice ou du coordinateur des stages. Le stage a pour but dinitier ltudiante ou ltudiant  lactivit professionnelle dans le domaine de la traduction de langlais au franais et de lui faire connatre le monde du travail. (Le dpartement fera tout son possible pour faciliter lobtention dun stage mais ne peut sengager  trouver un stage pour toutes les candidates et candidats.) (F)"
FTRA 425 "Stage de formation : du franais  langlais II" "Pralables : 60 crdits en traduction et autorisation de la coordinatrice ou du coordinateur des stages. Le stage a pour but dinitier ltudiante ou ltudiant  lactivit professionnelle dans le domaine de la traduction du franais  langlais et de lui faire connatre le monde du travail. (Le dpartement fera tout son possible pour faciliter lobtention dun stage mais ne peut sengager  trouver un stage pour toutes les candidates et candidats.) (A)"
FTRA 438 "Initiation au sous-titrage" "Pralable : FTRA 301 ou 305, 304 ou 306. Ce cours a pour but dinitier les tudiantes et tudiants  la traduction audiovisuelle, en particulier au sous-titrage. Il comporte un volet thorique, avec lectures et analyses, ainsi quun volet pratique o sont traits les principes et les conventions du sous-titrage, les aspects techniques et les genres cinmatographiques. Sont aussi abordes la traduction de la voix hors-champ et les techniques daccessibilit tels le sous-titrage pour malentendants et laudiodescription."
FTRA 452 "Traduction automatique (TA) et traduction assiste par ordinateur (TAO)" "Pralables : FTRA 416. Ce cours permet danalyser les aspects morphologiques, lexicaux, syntaxiques et smantiques des systmes de traduction automatise. Ltudiante et ltudiant apprennent  appliquer les concepts analyss  un systme commercialis. Ils valuent des traductions machine, font des exercices simples de programmation portant sur des problmes linguistiques; ils appliquent des outils de gestion et de traduction au matriel  localiser  laide de logiciels de localisation, de logiciels de terminologie, et de mmoires de traduction."
FTRA 455 "Gestion de projets" "Pralables : 12 crdits FTRA. Ce cours traite de la gestion des projets de traduction/localisation multilingues, depuis la rdaction de loffre de services, jusquau contrle de la qualit et la livraison, en passant par la rsolution de problmes et la gestion en situation de crise. Il comprend une partie thorique et des mises en situation. Les tudiantes et tudiants se familiarisent avec lvaluation des ressources (humaines et matrielles) ncessaires pour excuter le travail, llaboration dchanciers et le suivi dun budget. Ils apprennent  grer les ressources affectes aux projets afin de pouvoir respecter le mandat qui leur est confi."
FTRA 458 "Pratique de la localisation" "Pralables : 12 crdits FTRA. Ltudiante et ltudiant tudieront dans ce cours les stratgies de localisation et les processus de localisation : la localisation de logiciels et la localisation de sites web; les acteurs dans les projets de localisation; la situation et le travail du traducteur dans les projets de localisation; les types de fichiers  localiser : ressources, code source, fichiers daide, guides imprims, matriel marketing; les types de logiciels localiss : logiciels systme, logiciels de gestion, logiciels client, logiciels multimdia, logiciels web."
FTRA 492 "Tutorat en traduction" "Pralables : 12 crdits de traduction au niveau  400  et permission du dpartement. tude dun sujet particulier dans le domaine de la traduction."
FTRA 498 "tude avance dun sujet particulier" ""
FTRA 499 "tude avance dun sujet particulier" "Les pralables de ces cours, ainsi que les sujets particuliers qui y sont tudis, sont indiqus dans le"
GEOG 260 "Mapping the Environment (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 264 "Programming for Environmental Sciences (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 272 "The Natural Environment: Air and Water (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 274 "The Natural Environment: Land and Life (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 361 "Research Design and Qualitative Methods (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 362 "Statistical Methods (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 363 "Geographic Information Systems (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 371 "Landscape Ecology (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 374 "Plant Ecology (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 375 "Hydrology (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 377 "Landform Evolution (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 378 "The Climate System (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 458 "Environmental Impact Assessment (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 463 "Advanced Geographic Information Systems (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 464 "Programming for Geospatial Technologies (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 465 "Remote Sensing (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 466 "Geomedia and the Geoweb (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 470 "Environmental Management (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 473 "Environment and Health (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 474 "Sustainable Forest Management (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 475 "Water Resource Management (3 credits)" ""
GEOG 478 "Climate Change: Science, Impacts and Policy (3 credits)" ""
GEOL 210 "Introduction to the Earth (3 credits)" ""
GEOL 216 "Field Methods (3 credits)" ""
GEOL 302 "Palaeobiology (3 credits)" ""
GEOL 331 "Evolution of the Earth (3 credits)" ""
GEOL 415 "Plate Tectonics and Crustal Evolution (3 credits)" ""
GEOL 440 "Seminar in Current Research on Environmental Earth Science (3 credits)" ""
GEOL 203 "Introduction to Environmental Geology" "Prerequisite: GEOL 210 recommended. Environmental geology is concerned with the physical, chemical, and biological processes that have acted, and continue to act, upon the planet, shaping its evolution. The course examines the interactions of lithosphere, mantle, core, biosphere, atmosphere, cryosphere, and hydrosphere. The Earths climate is in part determined by these Earth system interactions, and climate change throughout the Earths history is a central theme of the course."
GEOL 204 "Natural Disasters" "This course introduces students to natural disasters. Students gain an understanding of the geological and meteorological environments of the world that allow humans to plan for avoidance and mitigation of disasters. Topics may include plate tectonics, earthquakes, volcanoes, tsunamis, landslides and mudslides, hurricanes, floods, wildfires, ice storms, thunderstorms, and tornadoes."
GEOL 206 "Earthquakes, Volcanoes, and Plate Tectonics" "This course is for students with little or no previous background in the earth sciences, providing an up-to-date account of our present knowledge of earthquakes and volcanoes, and the use of this information in the development of the theory of plate tectonics. Areas of concentration are: nature, distribution, and causes of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, measuring earthquakes, great earthquakes and volcanic eruptions in world history, products of volcanic eruptions, and hazards from, and prediction of, earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. The theory of plate tectonics and the evolution of mountain belts of the world are studied. Lectures only."
GEOL 208 "The Earth, Moon and the Planets" "The course emphasizes the cosmic perspective of the Earth and focuses attention on how the results of the last two decades of planetary exploration have brought about an intellectual revolution concerning the planets, especially their surface features, processes, and histories. Lectures only."
GEOL 210 "Introduction to the Earth" "This course provides an overview of the physical processes that govern how the Earth works. Topics include origin of the solar system and Earth; analysis of the internal structure of the Earth; minerals and rocks; igneous and metamorphic processes; deformation of the crust; surficial processes, including weathering, deposition and glaciation. The course culminates with the integration of these geological processes in the theory of plate tectonics, and goes on to examine the interactions of crust, mantle, atmosphere, and biosphere from this perspective. Laboratory work includes the identification of rocks and minerals, map exercises, and a field trip. Lectures and laboratory."
GEOL 216 "Field Methods" "Prerequisite: GEOL 210. The purpose of this course is twofold: to learn the basic methods that geologists, physical geographers, and environmental scientists use in the field (including learning how to map, measuring stratigraphic sections, and solving field problems based on observations) and to become familiar with the immediate geological environment of the Montreal region from the young Quaternary sediments, Mesozoic intrusive rocks and Paleozoic assemblages (including rocks of the St. Lawrence Lowlands) to the ancient Precambrian, crystalline basement. Two-week field school in the spring, immediately after the final examination."
GEOL 298 "Selected Topics in Geology" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule and Geography Course Guide."
GEOL 302 "Palaeobiology" "Prerequisite: GEOL 210. General discussion covers taphonomy, processes and patterns of evolution, extinction, ontogeny, palaeoecology and taxonomy. Systematics, morphology, biostratigraphic value of selected macro-invertebrate fossils will be included in the latter half of the course. Lectures and laboratory."
GEOL 331 "Evolution of the Earth" "Prerequisite: GEOL 210 or permission of the Department. The geological evolution of planet Earth is studied in the context of the theory of plate tectonics using interpretations of stratigraphic, structural, seismic, paleontologic, and geochronologic data. A systematic review of the geological evolution of the Earth and development of life forms is examined from the time of formation of the Earth to the present, including case studies of mountain belts. In the lab, rock suites and geological maps representative of different periods of Earth history are examined. Lectures and laboratory."
GEOL 398 "Selected Topics in Geology" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule and Geography Course Guide."
GEOL 414 "Undergraduate Research" "Prerequisite: For third-year honours students. Honours students in their final year are expected to show competence in isolating and examining a geological problem under the supervision of a faculty advisor. A written application to take the course, including a brief outline of the research project, must be made to the Department before April 15 of the second year. The application is reviewed by a committee and a decision forwarded by mail. The results of research must be presented in the form of an undergraduate thesis, two copies of which must be submitted by April 1."
GEOL 415 "Plate Tectonics and Crustal Evolution" "Prerequisite: GEOL 210; GEOL 331 or GEOG 377; or permission of the Department. Techniques of data collection in tectonics. Structure and rheology of the upper mantle. Tectonics of crustal types to include shields, platforms, passive continental margins, phanerozoic foldbelts, continental rifts, island-arc trench belts and oceanic rises, sea-floor spreading, plate tectonics, magma associations, and plate reconstructions. Crustal origin and growth. Lectures and laboratory."
GEOL 440 "Seminar in Current Research on Environmental Earth Science" "Prerequisite: GEOL 331 or GEOG 377, or 60 credits in an Engineering program, or permission of the Department. This course covers current research in environmental Earth science; topics vary from year to year, but will generally include: mantle-biosphere-atmosphere interactions, the carbon and methane cycles, and the geological climate record. Evaluation is based on seminar participation and written work."
GEOL 498 "Advanced Topics in Geology" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule and Geography Course Guide."
URBS 230 "Urbanization: Global and Historical Perspectives" "This course examines how and why cities grow and change over time. The relationships between socio-cultural, economic, and physical aspects of urban development are considered at the local, city, and regional scales."
URBS 240 "Planning" "This course examines the emergence and evolution of contemporary planning ideas within the broader historical context of 19th- and 20th-century city development. Special attention is given to how planning theories and practices have informed the development and management of urban, suburban and rural environments."
URBS 250 "Representation Methods in Urban Studies" "This course introduces students to theories and methods of graphic representation. It focuses on methods used to analyze and communicate data with an emphasis on spatial information on built and social environments. The representation methods include two- and three-dimensional views, cartography, as well as data visualization. Physical and digital tools are covered. Lectures and laboratory."
URBS 260 "Analytical Methods in Urban Studies" "This is an introduction to qualitative research skills associated with urban studies. The emphasis is on the use of data sources and collection techniques along with analytical procedures appropriate to questions of urban planning and public policy. Lectures and laboratory."
URBS 298 "Selected Topics in Urban Studies" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule and Geography Course Guide."
URBS 300 "Neighbourhood and Community Planning " "Prerequisite: GEOG 220 or URBS 230. This course examines theories, issues, and techniques of community-level planning in urban and suburban environments. Particular place-based or identity-based communities and their participation in planning processes are considered. Models of community change and local development are reviewed, along with the policies and supportive infrastructure in cities, including Montreal. Local governance, decision-making, and public participation are considered in light of municipal and regional institutions which currently predominate in Canadas metropolitan areas."
URBS 310 "Urban Transportation " "Prerequisite: GEOG 220 or URBS 230 or permission of the Department. This course examines the past evolution and recent functioning of various transport modes in cities around the world. Recent debates about desirable levels of car, transit, and non-motorized modes feature prominently. Techniques of analyzing urban transport and public policy options are considered in light of burgeoning concerns about sustainable development and the worldwide growth of motorization."
URBS 333 "Urban Laboratory" "Prerequisite: URBS 250 and 260; enrolment in the BA Honours in Urban Planning or BA Specialization in Urban Planning. With an emphasis on first-hand knowledge of an area-based problem, students study an urban problem and simulate solutions. Theory and case studies are used to develop appropriate interventions. Plans are prepared and, under the supervision of the professor, are evaluated by the peer group and experts in the field."
URBS 335 "Geographic Information Systems" "Prerequisite: URBS 250. This course is an introduction to current theoretical and practical approaches to Geographic Information Systems (GIS) through which students acquire basic skills and understanding in the use of GIS for spatial analysis. Training is centred on a series of practical assignments using ArcGIS software and for the term project, students explore the potential of GIS for addressing a real-world problem. Lectures and laboratory."
URBS 337 "Urban Agriculture" "Prerequisite: URBS 230 or GEOG 220 or permission of the Department. This course examines the history and practice of producing food in cities. Students explore the tensions between the politics, economies and ecologies that organize urban food production and the everyday ways people raise and access food in varied urban contexts. The course also critically evaluates food-based social movements: their limits, possibilities and connections to wider struggles for socio-economic justice."
URBS 338 "Urban Ecology" "Prerequisite: 24 credits; or permission of the Department. Focusing on the impacts of human activities on fauna, flora, soils and air, this course introduces students to ecosystems found in urban environments. This course also examines the flux of energy and materials to and from the city, and places a strong emphasis on policy and planning practices related to urban forestry, site restoration, greening initiatives, environmental justice, and on practices that foster biodiversity and responsible resource management. The course also looks at historical and contemporary views on the relationship between the city and nature."
URBS 362 "Quantitative Research Methods" "Prerequisite: URBS 260. This course covers the most commonly employed methods for quantitative social science research. Students are taught the basics of introductory classical statistics (both descriptive and inferential) and gain experience applying these methods with commonly used software tools and real-world data. Lectures and laboratory."
URBS 380 "Urban and Regional Economic Development" "Prerequisite: URBS 230, 240. This course draws on economic and geographical concepts to examine the process of urbanization. Students begin by focusing on the conventional tools and models for analyzing the nature and structure of cities, and at theories concerning the location of economic activity. It also examines key planning issues associated with the (evolving) role of cities as place of production, distribution, and consumption and considers the role of public policy in addressing these issues. Methods for defining and measuring urban economies for the purpose of analysis are reviewed."
URBS 393 "Law and Regulation in Urban Planning " "Prerequisite: URBS 230 and 240. Urban planning as governmental activity is defined by planning legislation in Quebec. This course covers the major bodies of legislation relevant to urban plans, local development plans, environmental protection, agricultural land preservation, heritage, and economic development. The law is a framework for development control and direct intervention at municipal, regional and provincial levels."
URBS 398 "Selected Topics in Urban Studies" "Special topics in urban studies."
URBS 420 "The Social and Cultural Geographies of Montreal" "Prerequisite: GEOG 361 or URBS 360 or 362. This course explores the social and cultural geographies of Montreal with particular emphasis on how the spatial distribution of communities influences urban planning and public policy at the local and regional levels. Complex webs of identities and solidarities informed by socio-economic, linguistic, ethno-cultural, and sexual orientation factors shape the city living experience of individuals and populations alike. Through lectures, discussions, assignments and field trips, students are introduced to a variety of analytical perspectives that investigate the socio-cultural dynamics that contribute to shaping urban settlements, human-environment interactions and local social networks."
URBS 433 "Advanced Urban Laboratory" "Prerequisite: URBS 333 and 393. This is an advanced course in urban design. An overview of current theory and practice is presented. An urban problem is developed and appropriate interventions are considered. These interventions are simulated and the results assessed."
URBS 434 "Transportation GIS" "Prerequisite: URBS 310 and 335, or GEOG 363 and 333; or permission of the Department. This course introduces students to the transportation planning and modelling process aided by the use of a GIS-based transportation decision aid tool. A real-world case-study region and transportation system is used to illustrate the different elements of the planning and modelling process. The course aims to highlight both the strengths and weaknesses (particularly with regard to how it treats the interaction between the transportation system and land use) of the traditional transportation planning approach."
URBS 435 "Transportation Impact Assessment" "Prerequisite: URBS 310 or GEOG 333; URBS 335 or GEOG 363; or permission of the Department. This course introduces students to the quantitative analysis of the environmental (e.g. emissions) and social impacts (e.g. accessibility) of transportation system interventions. Students are introduced to, and gain hands-on experience with, the traditional transportation planning and modelling process aided by the use of a Geographic Information System (GIS)-based transportation decision aid tool. A real-world case-study region and transportation system are used to illustrate the different elements of the planning and modelling process and how this can be used in impact assessment. Lectures and laboratory."
URBS 450 "Economic Restructuring" "Prerequisite: GEOG 330 or GEOG 380 or URBS 380 or permission of the Department. This course examines the nature of firm restructuring in late capitalism and the implications that industrial restructuring trends are having for the geography of industries, the structure of firms, workplace relations and workers rights. It examines the new challenges that restructuring presents for both economic development prospects and labour market policies, as well as looks at contemporary initiatives to promote more socially and environmentally sustainable development paths."
URBS 460 "Reading the Urban Form" "Prerequisite: URBS 360 or 362 and completion of 48 university credits; or permission of the Department. This course focuses on the physical reality of the city, or its urban form, as well as the ongoing process of city building and urban morphogenesis. It introduces tools to properly describe, quantify, and interpret urban form in its spatial and temporal dimensions. It seeks to develop a better understanding of the processes of which the contemporary urban artifact is the result. Along with theoretical presentations, the course makes use of case studies conducted in different urban and cultural contexts, and introduces many examples of practical applications of morphological analysis in urban planning and design."
URBS 480 "Impact Assessment" "Prerequisite: URBS 360 or 362 and completion of 48 university credits; or permission of the Department. The impacts of projects on urban and suburban communities and the environment are studied within the context of environmental protection legislation. The methods of assessment are then applied to specific cases."
URBS 481 "Urban Planning in the Developing World " "Prerequisite: GEOG 330 or URBS 380 or permission of the Department. This course explores the growth and planning of large metropolitan areas in developing nations. Issues and problems associated with recent urbanization are examined along with potential solutions offered by urban planning and public policies. The planning roles of institutions including governments, multi-lateral development agencies, and non-governmental organizations are reviewed."
URBS 483 "Directed Studies/Practicum in Urban Planning I" "Prerequisite: Completion of 60 university credits; enrolment in the Specialization in Urban Planning. Through a case study or practicum of 120 hours with a private or public institution, or community interest group, students acquire experience in a professional working environment."
URBS 484 "Directed Studies/Practicum in Urban Planning II" "Prerequisite: Completion of 60 university credits; enrolment in the Specialization in Urban Planning. Through a case study or practicum of 120 hours with a private or public institution, or community interest group, students acquire experience in a professional working environment."
URBS 486 "Behaviour and the Environment" "Prerequisite: URBS 360 or 362 and completion of 48 university credits; or permission of the Department. Human behaviour is seen both as a determinant and as an outcome of environment. Behavioural topics include perception and attitudes, spatial behaviour, spatial cognition, and time-path analysis. Student projects involve applying the theory to a location study, a facility management study, or other relevant application."
URBS 488 "Analyzing Choice" "Prerequisite: URBS 360 or 362 or GEOG 362; or permission of the Department. This course examines the theory and statistical techniques commonly used to analyze choice. Students design, administer and analyze the results of a stated preference survey on a topic related to peoples choices and the environment."
URBS 490 "Public Space and the Public Interest" "Prerequisite: URBS 360 or 362 and completion of 48 university credits; or permission of the Department. Public space is understood as physical space, as well as the space of media and communications, which are openly accessible to all members of a community. Changing definitions of public space are examined in the context of societal and cultural change. The roles of agents and stakeholders in changing the definitions of public interest are also examined. Legal and normative frameworks for the definition of space, control, and access are also introduced."
URBS 491 "Honours Thesis or Project" "Prerequisite: Completion of 60 university credits; enrolment in the Honours in Urban Planning. Students may undertake independent, supervised research leading to the production of an honours thesis. They may also undertake a major urban study leading to recommendations for public or private interventions."
URBS 495 "Field Research " "Prerequisite: 60 university credits and permission of the Department. The political, social, and cultural realities of planning in a setting are explored in a field course. Preparation (course meetings and readings) for the field experience at the University is followed by on-site research in the chosen city, where a field investigation is conducted, usually in collaboration with local partner organizations."
URBS 498 "(3 credits)" "Special topics in urban studies."
HIST 203 "History of Canada, Pre-Confederation" "A survey of Canadian history, from settlement to Confederation, emphasizing readings and discussions on selected problems."
HIST 205 "(also listed as SCPA 205)" ""
HIST 206 "Medieval Europe" "A survey of the history of Europe during the Middle Ages, from the fifth century to the 15th century, with consideration of political, social, economic, intellectual, and religious developments."
HIST 207 "Early Modern Europe" "This course offers an introduction to European history from the 15th through the 18th centuries. It encompasses the Renaissance, the Reformation, the Scientific Revolution, and the Enlightenment. Other topics include European contact with the New World, the formation of commercial and colonial empires, the related transformation of economic and social relations in Europe, and arguably the first modern political revolutions."
HIST 208 "Introduction to the History of the Balkans" "This course surveys the history of Europe through the Balkans (a region consisting of present-day Bulgaria, Romania, Macedonia, Albania, Greece, Montenegro, Kosovo/Kosova, Serbia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Croatia), from the pre-modern period to the present day. Emphasis is placed on the cultural diversity of the region and its impact on peace and conflict. Topics include the rise and fall of empires, economic change, religious transformation, violence, and the impact of ideologies such as nationalism, democracy, fascism, and communism."
HIST 209 "Quebec to 1867" "An introductory survey of the history of Quebec from its origins as a colony to the creation of modern Canada by the British North American Act of 1867. Particular emphasis is placed on a consideration of those elements of Quebecs past which best assist in the comprehension of the trends prevalent in modern Quebec."
HIST 210 "(also listed as SCPA 210)" ""
HIST 211 "(also listed as IRST 211)" ""
HIST 212 "(also listed as IRST 210)" ""
HIST 213 "(also listed as IRST 205)" ""
HIST 219 "(also listed as CLAS 230)" ""
HIST 223 "(also listed as CLAS 240)" " "
HIST 225 "(also listed as CLAS 242) " " "
HIST 235 "(also listed as RELI 235) " " "
HIST 242 "History of the Middle East" "This course surveys the history of the Middle East from the rise of Islam to the present. It traces broadly the formation of an Islamic World over a millennium and follows its engagements with modernity, examining closely the shift from the overarching paradigm of the multi-ethnic/multilinguistic Ottoman Empire to that of the mono-ethnic/monolinguistic modern nation state. This course covers the political history of the region including the experience of British and French colonialism, the rise of nationalist movements, and the Arab-Israeli conflict, and focuses on its social, intellectual, and cultural history."
HIST 251 "History of the United States to the Civil War Era" "This course surveys American history from settlement to the Civil War Era. It deals with the political and economic framework of American history, and with social and cultural trends."
HIST 253 "History of the United States since the Civil War Era" "This course surveys American history from the Civil War Era to the present. It deals with the political and economic framework of American history, and with social and cultural trends."
HIST 261 "History of South Asia" "This course is an introduction to the intellectual traditions, social structures, and political institutions of South Asia, with particular attention to developments during the past two centuries."
HIST 262 "History of China" "A survey of Chinas history from earliest times to the modern era."
HIST 263 "History of Japan" "This course surveys Japans history from earliest times to the modern era. In addition to tracing political developments, it explores other themes such as the changing role of the samurai in history and the evolution of Japanese art, literature, and popular culture."
HIST 264 "History of Africa" "This course is an introductory survey of the history of Africa. It examines the major phenomena of African historical experience, including the development of precolonial kingdoms and trans-Saharan trade, the slave trade, colonial conquests, the rise of nationalism, the challenges of independence, and recent crises such as the Rwandan genocide and HIV-AIDS. Emphasis is placed on popular cultural expression through which people on the continent have experienced, understood, remembered, and negotiated broad historical shifts."
HIST 274 "The Atlantic World" "This course examines how an Atlantic world emerged between the 15th and 19th centuries. As societies in Africa, the Americas, and Europe came into increasingly regular contact, the ocean became a nexus rather than a gulf between them. By studying historical documents from the period and scholarly debates about how to interpret them, we explore why and how these long-distance connections provoked a range of unprecedented transformations for people on four continents."
HIST 276 "History of Latin America: The Colonial Period" "This course surveys Latin America up to the wars of independence from Spain. The main themes examined are pre- and post-Columbian indigenous cultures; the Spanish conquest; patterns of colonial trade and economy; the role of the church; and the Bourbon reforms."
HIST 277 "History of Latin America: The Modern Period" "This course surveys Latin American society in the 19th and 20th centuries. The principal topics covered are the social and economic roots of political instability; Mexico under Porfirio Daz; the Mexican Revolution; Argentina and Brazil under Pern and Vargas; U.S.-Latin American relations; Castros Cuba; revolution and counter-revolution in contemporary Latin America."
HIST 281 "Film in History" "This course examines how selected commercial films interpret historical events or provide insight into the politics, society, and culture of the times in which they were produced. The course is designed to help develop critical skills for the understanding of film in an historical framework."
HIST 283 "The 20th Century: A Global History" "This course introduces students to the history of some of the forces and institutions that have shaped the history of the world in the 20th century, which has been characterized by widespread warfare, genocides, and massive violations against human rights and the natural environment. It has also been a time of unprecedented prosperity of some groups and parts of the globe, as well as an era of tremendous scientific advances."
HIST 285 "(also listed as ANTH 285/POLI 285/SOCI 285)" ""
HIST 298 "Selected Topics in History" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
HIST 301 "Late-19th-Century Canada" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the politics of confederation and explores the social, economic, and cultural impact of modernization."
HIST 302 "Natives and Newcomers " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the interaction of European colonists with the first peoples of eastern North America before 1800. The emphasis is on cultural exchanges between colonists and Natives in the areas of religion, trade, diplomacy, and warfare."
HIST 303 "Native North American History Since 1800 " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the history of Native North Americans, focusing on the period since 1800. Topics include the emergence of the reserve system and the policy of forced assimilation devised by the governments of Canada and the United States, and the political resurgence and cultural renaissance of Native communities since the mid-20th century."
HIST 304 "Tutorial Preparation for the Honours Essay" "Prerequisite: Approved honours standing in History, or permission of the Department. This course provides honours students in History with the opportunity for tutorial reading and research in preparation for the writing of the honours essay."
HIST 305 "Race and Gender in Canadian History " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the lives and experiences of Canadian women and men marginalized because of their race, gender and/or sexuality. By looking at people on the margins, this course explores the intersections of gender, race, and space, and speaks to two key issues of today: equality and justice."
HIST 306 "History and the Public" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course is an examination of the practice of history outside the academy and an introduction to the critical analysis of presentations of history in public and popular culture. Topics include archives, corporate and popular history, museums and historic sites, preservation, film and television, theme parks, and anniversary commemorations. A special emphasis is placed on public controversies and ethical dilemmas involving historical interpretations."
HIST 307 "History of Montreal" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). A study of the origins of the city, its role in the Empire of the St. Lawrence, and its rise to metropolitan dominance in Canada. Special emphasis on economic development and on ethnic groupings."
HIST 308 "Cultures in Contact: A History of Migrations to North America" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course traces the journeys of men, women, and children who left their homelands and came to North America in search of economic opportunities and political and religious freedoms. Focusing on the 19th- and 20th-century waves of migration, students examine the communities migrants created, the discrimination they faced, and the manifold ways in which they, in turn, changed their host societies."
HIST 309 "Law and Society in Canadian History " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines selected issues in Canadian history through the lens of important and controversial court decisions. The influence of legal decisions on society as well as public influence on the development of law is considered."
HIST 310 "Canada in the Early-20th Century, 18961939" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). An intensive study of early-20th-century Canada concentrating on selected themes in economic, political, social, and cultural history."
HIST 311 "Contemporary Canada, 1939 to the Present" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). An intensive study of Canada since World War II concentrating on selected themes in economic, political, social, and cultural history."
HIST 313 "Quebec in the 19th Century" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course explores the major social, economic, and political issues that arose during the 1800s in the transformation of Quebec from a pre-industrial to an industrial society."
HIST 314 "Quebec in the 20th Century" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course explores the major social, economic, and political issues of 20th-century Quebec in the light of the concentration of economic power into relatively few hands early in the century and the declining importance of industrial production since World War II."
HIST 315 "Rights and Freedoms in Canadian Society" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines historical and contemporary aspects of Canadas culture of rights. Topics include the origins and workings of the Canadian Charter and critiques of rights culture."
HIST 318 "Modernist New York " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course explores the history of Modernist New York from the vantage points of social and cultural history. Focusing on the decades between 1870 and 1930, it examines the interplay of culture and commerce, the histories of elites and recent immigrants, the role of race, and the dramatic changes in the cityscape."
HIST 319 "Canadian History in Literature, Art and Film" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). An examination of some major events and themes in Canadian history as seen by writers, artists, and filmmakers. Topics will vary from year to year, but will be selected to illustrate how creative works may be combined with more conventional historical sources to enhance our understanding of the past."
HIST 320 "American Culture, 19001945" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines how American cultural expression was affected by the broader historical context of the period. Attention is given to changing aesthetic styles, the impact of technology on production and reception, and the role of culture as a representation of American identity."
HIST 321 "American Culture Since 1945" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines different forms of artistic expression in the U.S. since World War II. Attention is given to changing aesthetic styles and technological developments, as well as to the role of culture as an expression of American identity at home and abroad."
HIST 323 "(also listed as CLAS 341) " " "
HIST 324 "United States, 1877-1924 " "This course looks at the transformation of the United States from a rural debtor nation into an urban, industrial, and financial world power. It explores how a variety of social groups experienced this change as well as its impact on the meaning of democracy, the role of government and the definition of citizenship. The course also examines U.S. foreign relations in this period."
HIST 325 "The European Renaissance " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course surveys European history from the beginnings of the Italian Renaissance in the late-14th century to the Reformation in the early-16th century. Major themes include Renaissance humanism, the emergence of print culture, the exploration of the New World, changes in social structure, and the consolidation of monarchy."
HIST 326 "Reformations in Early Modern Europe" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course surveys the history of Europe from the early Reformation through the end of Europes religious wars in the mid-17th century. Major themes include the politics of religion, the growth of commerce and social change, competition for empire, and transformation in scientific and political worldviews."
HIST 327 "(also listed as CLAS 343) " " "
HIST 328 "The Scientific Revolution " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course explores the Scientific Revolution in the context of early modern European society and culture. Major themes include the debates over the methods, purposes, and scope of science; the relationship between science, the supernatural, and the occult; the relationship between science, technology, and craft; and scientific networks, institutions, and means of communication."
HIST 329 "Music in History " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines music as a medium for understanding the past. Depending on the historical focus, issues such as colonialism, nationalism, social movements, urban culture, youth culture, race, gender, and class through the prism of contemporaneous music genres may be considered. The course may also address the transformation of acoustic spaces and musical instruments, the rise of sound recording, radio broadcasting, online streaming, and the history of music copyright in relation to its composition, performance, recording, broadcasting, and streaming. Students have an option to create a podcast or curate a DJ set for a term project."
HIST 330 "(also listed as IRST 312)" ""
HIST 332 "United States, Cuban and Mexican Relations " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the history of the United States relations with both Cuba and Mexico from the mid-19th century to the present. As well as studying the ramifications of U.S. involvement in such events as the Spanish-American War (1898), the Mexican Revolution (1910), and the Cuban Revolution (1959), it examines the demographic, political, and cultural impact that Cubans and Mexicans have had on the modern development of the U.S.A."
HIST 333 "History of Haiti: From Contact to Independence " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course is a study of Haitian history from early colonization through French control to independence in 1804. It covers pre-Columbian Taino society and the Spanish conquest; the period of piracy and French buccaneering in the 16th and 17th centuries; the emergence of a colonial slave society in the 18th century; the Haitian revolution and the rise of Toussaint Louverture; questions of class and colour; the emergence of the state; contingencies of citizenship and independence. The legacies of the colonial and revolutionary periods are fundamental to an understanding of post-independence and present-day Haiti."
HIST 334 "History of Haiti: From Independence to Present " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course is a study of Haitian history from independence to the present. It covers the early post-independence regimes; the demise of the plantation economy and the emergence of the Haitian peasantry; the indemnity to France; later 19th-century neo-colonialism and political instability; the U.S. Marine Occupation (1915  1934); culture, race and politics during and after the Occupation; the rise of the Duvalieriest state; and post-Duvalierist political instability."
HIST 335 "Barbarian Invasions and the Birth of Europe" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the arrival and settlement of new populations in the Roman world. It analyzes the changes that this event brought in its wake. Classical civilization was disrupted, but there was also a symbiosis of the old and the new, which in time gave rise to Europe in the Middle Ages."
HIST 336 "Deviancy and Orthodoxy in the History of Mexico " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course traces Mexican history from the colonial period to the modern era through an analysis of the various groups that state and society have defined as deviant, including barbarians, heretics, vagrants, lunatics, prostitutes, bandits, and insurgents. This course examines what the shifting preoccupations with and the persecutions of these groups reveal about the creation of political and social orthodoxy in Mexico across time."
HIST 339 "Crime and Punishment in Canadian History " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the history of crime and punishment in Canada. Topics include the definition and regulation of deviance; policing; trials and the criminal law; prisons and theories of punishment; the death penalty; crime and the media. Students engage with a variety of primary and secondary sources in readings and assignments."
HIST 340 "Early Modern Britain and Ireland " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course surveys early modern British history, focusing on the Tudor and Stuart periods. Major themes include religious and cultural change, economic and social transformation, the formation of a modern state amid recurring periods of political conflict, changing relations between the Three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the beginnings of commercial and colonial expansion."
HIST 341 "History of Britain Since 1714" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course is a survey of the political, economic, and social development of Britain since the Stuart Era."
HIST 344 "Rise and Fall of Yugoslavia " "Through the study of the rise and fall of Yugoslavia during the 20th century, this course examines themes of modern European history, including empire, nationalism, democracy, fascism, war, genocide, and ethnic cleansing."
HIST 345 "Postwar Japanese History " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines Japan since the end of World War II. While tracing Japans rise to the status of an economic power, this course focuses primarily on social and cultural history."
HIST 346 "Sexuality in History " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course looks at the topic of human sexuality taking a broad view, both in time (from the Ancient world to the 20th century) and space (featuring Asia and Africa as well as the Western world). Rather than surveying the impossibly large canvas of sex throughout world history, this course looks at a number of particular topics (e.g. marital sexuality, same-sex relationships, sexual violence) in different cultures."
HIST 347 "Gender and Sexuality in South Asia " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course surveys the history of gender and sexuality in South Asia (India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh) from 1500 to the present, beginning in the Mughal period and concluding with an investigation of the post-colonial experience. Topics may include masculinity at the Mughal court, the European womans imperial burden, the regulation of sexuality in the Indian anti-colonial movement, the queer experience, identity formation in diaspora, and gender and religious fundamentalism."
HIST 348 "History of Violence: Middle East 1798  Present " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the multiple facets of violence in Middle Eastern historical contexts. The objective is to develop a critical approach for thinking about the nature of violence by using a historical perspective to complicate commonplace oppositions between its legitimate and illegitimate forms or its intelligibility and unintelligibility. Students explore the differences among state-sanctioned violence, resistance movements, and terrorism."
HIST 350 "Medieval England" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the history of England between the Norman Conquest in 1066 and 1500. Topics include the political, social, and cultural impact of the Norman Conquest; Jews and the expulsion of 1290; knights and peasants; the Peasants Revolt of 1381; crime and the Robin Hood legends; heresy and popular religion; urban culture and guilds."
HIST 351 "England in the Reign of Henry VIII" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines English history in the first half of the 16th century. In addition to specifically examining the personality and politics of Henry VIII himself, lectures and assignments examine broader social, religious, economic, and legal developments in the kingdom during his reign."
HIST 352 "German History in the 20th Century" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course studies the ideological, cultural, political, and socio-economic development of Germany from the First World War to the present."
HIST 353 "Colonial America and the Atlantic World" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course explores the economic, political, and cultural history of the Atlantic world as a context for understanding developments in 17th- and 18th-century North America, including Native-European relations, migrations, religious controversies, slavery, revolts and independence movements."
HIST 354 "Revolutionary America" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines themes and issues in the revolutionary and early national periods of American history."
HIST 355 "United States in the 19th Century, 18151850" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). A study of American political, social, and economic life from the end of the War of 1812 to about 1850  the intensification of sectionalism. Topics include geographic expansion and the beginnings of industrialization, the characteristics of southern slave society, and the rise of a system of political parties during the age of Jackson."
HIST 356 "United States in the 19th Century: The Era of the Civil War" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). A study of American political, social, and economic life before and after the Civil War, from about 1850 to 1890. Topics include sectionalism and the breakdown of parties during the 1850s, the tasks of Reconstruction after the war, the New South, and the problems of a maturing industrial society."
HIST 357 "Foreign Relations of the United States to 1945" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course provides an analysis of United States foreign policy from the American Revolution to the conclusion of the Second World War, emphasizing the domestic debate over foreign policy, national security, and economic development; commercial and territorial expansion; and the dynamics of Canadian-American relations."
HIST 358 "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1945 to the Present" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This is an historical investigation of United States foreign policy from the end of the Second World War to the present, emphasizing the United States responses to the challenge of revolutions in Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin America, American conceptions of a new world order, the rise of the multinational corporation, globalization, terrorism, humanitarian intervention, and developments in Canadian-American relations."
HIST 359 "(also listed as SOCI 366)" ""
HIST 360 "(also listed as SOCI 367)" ""
HIST 363 "Africa in the 20th Century" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines 20th-century African history. Beginning with the colonial conquests, the course traces the processes of social, cultural, and economic change that have shaped Africans experience of colonial domination and postcolonial statehood. Emphasis is placed on the ways in which historical change has been interpreted in African cultural production."
HIST 364 "Modern South Asia" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). British conquest established nearly two centuries of colonial rule over the worlds oldest civilization. This course examines the nature of imperial control, the resistance of traditional leaders, European intellectual imperialism, Indian cultural and religious revivalism, and modern nationalism. Special attention is paid to M.K. Gandhi and Gandhism as well as to Muslim separatism and the Pakistan movement."
HIST 365 "Human Rights and Genocide Prevention in History" "Human rights and humanitarian intervention to prevent genocide are contested concepts. This course examines the roots of Western notions of human rights, the evolution of the concept, and case studies clarifying the challenges confronting advocates and critics of humanitarian intervention. Historical examples address the uses of diplomacy, economic assistance, conflict management, and force in mass atrocity prevention and interdiction."
HIST 366 "Early Modern China" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines Chinese history during the Qing dynasty (1644-1912), with emphasis on political, social, diplomatic, and intellectual issues."
HIST 367 "Modern China" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines Chinas history since the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1912, with particular emphasis on the Nationalist and Communist revolutionary movements and on Chinas transformation since the establishment of the Peoples Republic of China in 1949."
HIST 368 "African Popular Culture " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course explores the varied terrain of African popular culture in the 19th and 20th centuries. The materials examined in this course range broadly, including not only scholarly work, but also fiction, film, music, and images that provide entry points into the ways African artists, youth, officials, freedom fighters, market women, bachelors, gangsters, and others have engaged culturally with the world around them."
HIST 369 "Middle East: Empire, Gender, and Sexuality in Modern Times" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the historical formation and intersection of three distinct phenomena: empire, gender, and sexuality. From the everyday practices of family life to the form of politics and the balance of geo-strategic relations, the 19th and 20th centuries witnessed a radical transformation of human organization within the Middle East and globally. Topics may include imperialism, state formation, nationalism, Orientalism, feminism, and Islam."
HIST 370 "Japanese Popular Culture " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course traces the history of Japanese popular culture from the 1600s to the present, with emphasis on the last 50 years. The major focus is on the evolution of Japanese popular media such as films, anime, and manga. Other themes such as youth culture, fashion, and the spread of Japanese popular culture outside of the countrys borders are explored. No background knowledge or Japanese language skills are required."
HIST 371 "History of the Russian Revolutionary Movement, 1825-1922" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course traces the evolution of the Russian revolutionary movement from the Decembrist Revolt (1825) to the Bolshevik consolidation of power (1922). Emphasis is placed on the development of Russian conceptions of socialism, Marxism, and anarchism; the roles undertaken by women in various revolutionary groups; and the Russian contribution to the development of modern terrorism."
HIST 372 "Latin American History Via the Novel" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines modern Latin American history and its representation by comparing fictional and factual depictions of key issues and significant events including economic imperialism, political revolution, and race relations. Texts such as Gabriel Garca Mrquezs literary masterpiece "
HIST 373 "The Pacific War " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course explores the history of the Pacific War, from its origins in the expansion of the Japanese empire to the atomic bombings, Japans surrender, and the shaping of postwar Asia. While covering battles, strategy and tactics, and the weapons of war, the course also looks at diverse themes such as home fronts, propaganda, and how the war has been remembered and represented since 1945."
HIST 374 "Egypt and the World Since 1798 " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course explores the social, cultural, and political histories of Egypt between the Napoleonic conquest and the present. Special attention is paid to the formation of Egyptian national identity in a post-Ottoman international context."
HIST 376 "The Caribbean and the Atlantic World" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course covers the period from post-Columbian contact to the late-19th century. Themes include the link between sugar and slavery; the slave trade and the emergence of plantation-based colonialism; racialized social and economic structures; slave resistance; the politics of abolition; alternative labour forms; and the rise of political movements."
HIST 377 "History of Russia, 1694-1917" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course traces Russian history from the era of Peter the Great to the Bolshevik Revolution. Emphasis is placed on long-term trends that continue to affect Russia today such as political liberty, economic development, warfare and foreign affairs, and gender relations."
HIST 378 "History of the Soviet Union" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the main economic, social, and political developments of the history of the Soviet Union from its creation in 1917 to its collapse in 1991. Particular attention is paid to the Stalin era, the impact of World War II, and the Cold War."
HIST 379 "History through Visual Media and Material Culture" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). Public encounters with history are increasingly mediated by television, film, the Internet, and museological experiences. This course explores the relationship between the public and the past by examining issues in the production, distribution, and reception of history via these new and changing technologies."
HIST 380 "History and Digital Media " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course offers an introduction to the changes that new media and technologies are bringing to historical research, writing, presentation, and teaching of the past. The course begins with an overview of the history of the Internet and digital media, and then examines historical work on a variety of subjects  by scholars, teachers, archivists, museum curators, and popular historians  published on the web. Historical and critical readings provide the basis for the hands-on section of the course in which students develop pilot online history projects."
HIST 381 "The Politics of the Past" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the uses of history and the role of the historian in the political arena, focusing on cases in which the past has underwritten social movements or mediated public controversies. Topics may include controversies over political recognition, historical apologies, reparations, restorative justice, and the repatriation of cultural artifacts."
HIST 382 "Age of Enlightenment" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course surveys the intellectual and cultural history of Europe and the Atlantic World from the later 17th century through the 18th century."
HIST 383 "Age of Revolution " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course focuses on the French political and English industrial revolutions and their consequences throughout Europe. Colonialism, slavery, and the Atlantic revolutions in the Americas are considered to the extent that they contributed to, or were influenced by, the revolutions in Europe."
HIST 384 "Age of Industrialization and Nationalism 1848-1914" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). A study of the transformation of European society, economy, and politics in the years between the upheavals of the mid-19th century and the collapse of the traditional order in World War I."
HIST 385 "Age of Dictators: Europe, 1914-1945" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). A study of the internal development and external relations of the nations of Europe from the Great War to the end of World War II. The course examines this chaotic age primarily through an investigation of the revolutionary and reactionary upheavals that kept Europe socially, politically, and economically unbalanced for 30 years."
HIST 386 "Contemporary Europe: 1945 to the Present" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). A study of the internal development and external relations of the nations of Europe from the collapse of Nazi Germany to the present. The course concentrates on the divisions between East and West, the economic recovery of Europe and the effects of the energy crisis on social, economic, and political life throughout Europe."
HIST 387 "Selected Topics in Public History " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). Specific topics for this course, and relevant prerequisites, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
HIST 388 "Oral History and Creative Practice " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course is an introduction to oral history theory, ethics, and practice, and surveys the many oral history projects underway in Montreal and around the globe."
HIST 389 "Ethnography: Doing Micro-History of the Present" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course introduces basic tools of ethnographic research and documenting using both traditional and new media, with attention to ethical, political, interpersonal, and aesthetic issues."
HIST 390 "Urban History Laboratory" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). Students conduct original archival and/or oral history research on a selected aspect of Montreals history and then go public with their research in creative and engaging ways."
HIST 391 "Independent Study Tutorial in History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course permits individual study, with a selected faculty member, in a specialized area not available among regular 300-level classes."
HIST 392 "France 1871 to the Present" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course introduces students to the history of France from the Commune of 1871 to the Fifth Republic. This course deals with such issues as the Dreyfus Affair, the legacy of two World Wars in French history, the Vichy regime, collaboration and French fascism, the May events of 1968, and so forth. Political, social, and intellectual developments will be discussed."
HIST 394 "Food in History " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course considers the economic, political, and cultural changes in food production, diets and cuisines from 1700 to the present from a global, comparative perspective. Lectures, primary and secondary source readings, films, research and hands-on activities explore diverse topics such as hunting and gathering; cooking traditions and innovations; cultural and ethical dimensions of eating and fasting; agriculture and food markets; the politics of famine; factory farms, industrial processing, and nutritional science; the emergence of the restaurant, the supermarket, fast food; and the globalization of modern diets."
HIST 395 "Environmental History " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course surveys major themes and problems in global environmental history from the last ice age to the present, but focusing primarily on Europe, Africa, Oceania, and the Americas since 1500. Topics include the history of ideas about nature; climate change; the Columbian Exchange; the environmental impact of science, technology, population growth, and urbanization; the politics of conservation; and environmentalism."
HIST 396 "The United States Since 1945" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). The immediate historical background of todays America is the subject matter of this course. Major themes include civil rights, the rise of modern feminism, and economic change."
HIST 397 "History and Sound " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines sound as a historical subject and a medium for understanding the past. Emphasizing aural rather than visual sources, it addresses a variety of topics including the history of aural art forms such as music and radio; sound recording and transmission technologies; commercial uses of sound; architectural acoustics; and the evolution of soundscapes. The course may include training in the production of radio documentaries, urban sound walks, and audio podcasts."
HIST 398 "Selected Topics in History" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
HIST 402 "The Philosophy and Practice of History" "Prerequisite: Approved honours standing in History, or permission of the Department. This course examines problems in the philosophy and practice of history. Particular attention is given to contemporary debates about history as a distinctive mode of understanding and explanation. This course is required of all honours students."
HIST 403 "Methodology and History" "Prerequisite: Approved honours standing in History, or permission of the Department. This course examines the variety of sources, methods, and modes of analysis used in the research and writing of history. It addresses both theoretical and practical aspects of method. This course is required of all honours students."
HIST 412 "Advanced Study in Canadian History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Advanced seminar in a selected topic in the history of Canada. The emphasis is on encouraging students to conduct historical investigation on their own, under a professors guidance. The specific content varies from year to year depending on the instructor."
HIST 437 "Advanced Study in European History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Advanced seminar in a selected topic in the history of Europe. The emphasis is on encouraging students to conduct historical investigation on their own, under a professors guidance. The specific content varies from year to year depending on the instructor."
HIST 452 "Advanced Study in American History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Advanced seminar in a selected topic in the history of the United States. The emphasis is on encouraging students to conduct historical investigation on their own, under a professors guidance. The specific content varies from year to year depending on the instructor."
HIST 457 "Advanced Study in Latin American and Caribbean History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Advanced seminar in a selected topic in Latin American and/or Caribbean history. The emphasis is on encouraging students to conduct historical investigation on their own, under a professors guidance. The specific content varies from year to year depending on the instructor."
HIST 462 "Advanced Study in Asian History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Advanced seminar in a selected topic in Asian history. The emphasis is on encouraging students to conduct historical investigation on their own, under a professors guidance. The specific content varies from year to year depending on the instructor."
HIST 467 "Advanced Study in Middle Eastern History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Advanced seminar in a selected topic in Middle Eastern history. The emphasis is on encouraging students to conduct historical investigation on their own, under a professors guidance. The specific content varies from year to year depending on the instructor."
HIST 471 "Advanced Study in African History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Advanced seminar in a selected topic in the history of Africa. The emphasis is on encouraging students to conduct historical investigation on their own, under a professors guidance. The specific content varies from year to year depending on the instructor."
HIST 475 "Advanced Study in the History of Gender and Sexuality" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Advanced seminar in a selected topic in the history of gender and sexuality. The emphasis is on encouraging students to conduct historical investigation on their own, under a professors guidance. The specific content varies from year to year depending on the instructor."
HIST 477 "Advanced Study in the History of Human Rights and Justice" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This advanced seminar focuses on a selected topic in the history of human rights and justice. The emphasis is on encouraging students to conduct historical investigation independently, under a professors supervision. The specific content may vary from year to year."
HIST 479 "Advanced Study in Womens History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Advanced seminar in a selected topic in womens history. The emphasis is on encouraging students to conduct historical investigation on their own, under a professors guidance. The specific content varies from year to year depending on the instructor."
HIST 481 "Advanced Study in Public History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Advanced seminar in a selected topic in public history. In addition to weekly discussions of relevant readings, the emphasis is on encouraging students to conduct historical investigation on their own, under a professors guidance. The specific content varies from year to year depending on the instructor."
HIST 485 "Public History Workshop" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2); HIST 306. This course offers students the opportunity to conceive, plan, and carry out a project that presents a historical subject to the public. Students receive training in the public presentation of the past through several media and to a variety of audiences, and are encouraged to involve relevant parties outside the academy in the development of their project."
HIST 486 "Public History Internship" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2); HIST 306. This internship in public history is designed to allow students to test and hone their skills in a non-academic situation. Placements will be arranged by the faculty member responsible for the course and may be drawn from various potential employment sectors: public, non-profit, and private. Students, in consultation with the employer and the faculty advisor, are expected to fully participate in the defining of their internships. Students work according to a detailed job description and devote a minimum of 100 hours to the fieldwork component of the internship, keep a logbook describing their work activities, and submit a 20-25 page written report that summarizes and evaluates their work experience, positioning it in relation to broader academic questions in the field of public history. The employers participate in the assessment of the interns work. Students may find it useful to have second-language proficiency for the purposes of this internship."
HIST 491 "Individual Study Tutorial in History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course permits an individual student to pursue advanced study, with a selected faculty member, in a specialized area not available among scheduled 400-level seminars."
HIST 492 "Individual Study Tutorial in History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course permits an individual student to pursue advanced study, with a selected faculty member, in a specialized area not available among scheduled 400-level seminars."
HIST 493 "Honours Essay Tutorial" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course is open only to honours students in History. The student works with an individual faculty member in a particular area of history. Students are asked to produce a sustained piece of written work, not exceeding 40 pages in length, to be read by their advisor and at least one other member of the Department."
HIST 498 "Advanced Topics in History" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
IBUS 370 "(also listed as FINA 370)" "  International Financial Management"
IBUS 382 "(also listed as FINA 382)" "  Management of International Financial Institutions"
IBUS 462 "(also listed as MARK 462)" "  Environment of World Business"
IBUS 465 "(also listed as MARK 465)" "  International Marketing Management"
IBUS 466 "(also listed as MANA 466)" "  Management of Multinational Corporations"
IBUS 471 "Topics in International Business" "Prerequisite: MARK 462 or IBUS 462. This course is intended primarily to provide an opportunity for more intensive study in one or more specific topics of international business. The topic will vary according to the special interests of the professor and the students."
IBUS 492 "(also listed as MARK 492)" "  Cross-Cultural Communications and Management"
IBUS 493 "(also listed as MANA 493)" "  International Business Law"
INTERDISCIPLINARY PROGRAMS "" "Interdisciplinary minor programs usually consist of 24 or more credits and are to be combined with a department major, specialization, or honours. Interdisciplinary certificate programs normally consist of 30 credits and can be taken as independent programs. Interdisciplinary minor and certificate programs are listed below."
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES "" "The Major and Minor in Interdisciplinary Studies in Sexuality, offered jointly by the Faculty of Arts and Science and the Faculty of Fine Arts, draw their curriculum from a variety of disciplines. Their purpose is to investigate empirical, theoretical, and creative aspects of sexuality."
INTE 290 "Introduction to Computer Usage and Document Design" "This course teaches students how to use the latest Windows operating system in combination with Microsoft Office applications and how to use these tools to produce attractive, efficient, and informative documents. Basic notions of word processing, document design, data organization, and presentation are explored. The course is based on a step-by-step learning process, whereby students acquire the tools that they need to accomplish a specific task. A minimum of 40 hours of laboratory work is required."
INTE 293 "Computer Application Development" "This course introduces students to the use of contemporary computer tools in scientific applications. It is designed for students with some familiarity with the fundamentals of computing who wish to use computers as tools for research within science disciplines. The format is largely self-instructional, using computer-based tutorial packages. A minimum of 40 hours of laboratory work is required."
INTE 296 "Discover Statistics" "This course introduces students to the basics of statistics and is aimed at mastering the elementary analytical concepts of the subject. Topics include descriptive statistics, correlation and regression analysis, experimental analysis (test procedures), probability (distribution and theory), hypothesis testing, and analysis of variance."
INTE 298 "Special Topics" ""
INTE 299 "Special Topics" ""
INTE 398 "Special Topics" ""
INTE 399 "Special Topics" ""
INTE 498 "Special Topics" ""
INTE 499 "Special Topics" ""
IRST 203 "Introduction to Irish Studies" "This course is a multidisciplinary introduction to the field of Irish studies, a discipline that embraces a broad range of historical andcontemporary issues as they have manifested themselves on the island of Ireland, in Canada and throughout the world. In particular, questions related to individual and national identities in the context of history, language, culture, landscape, and religion are explored and debated."
IRST 205 "(also listed as HIST 213)" ""
IRST 209 "Highlights of Irish Literature " "This course introduces students to the foundational texts and main themes of Irish literary studies by placing key texts and authors in their cultural and literary backgrounds and exploring their resonances through to the present day. Works selected may include those of W.B. Yeats, Samuel Beckett, Seamus Heaney, and Eavan Boland."
IRST 210 "(also listed as HIST 212)" ""
IRST 211 "(also listed as HIST 211)" ""
IRST 228 "(also listed as THEO 228)" ""
IRST 230 "Irish Mythology and Folklore " "This course explores Irish culture through folklore and myth  in particular, their manifestations in Irish music, literature, performing arts, and cinema. It addresses the significance of myth and folklore in written and oral history, traditions, and iconography. The course focuses on the forms, functions, and influences of Irish legends, myths, and folktales that attract learned and popular interest in Ireland and abroad."
IRST 233 "The Irish Language and its Culture I " "This course provides a general introduction to Irish linguistic and cultural practices in modern and contemporary Ireland. It explores the principles of the Irish language and introduces students to the language through folklore, song, poetry, film, drama, and storytelling."
IRST 270 "Irish Traditional Music: A Global Soundscape " "Covering a tapestry of cultural history from the ancient Celts to modern mega shows like "
IRST 298 "Selected Topics in Irish Studies" ""
IRST 299 "Selected Topics in Irish Studies" ""
IRST 300 "Research Methods in Irish Studies " "Prerequisite: IRST 203, 209, 210, 211; IRST 270 or 343 or 344 or 371 or 373; or permission of the Department. Irish Studies span a spectrum of disciplines from the humanities, fine arts and the social and political sciences. Conducting research within this diverse domain requires a broad-based set of applied and theoretical skills. This interdisciplinary course prepares upper-level undergraduates for research in Irish studies, for academic and field situations in Ireland, and in Irish diasporic settings overseas. While cross-disciplinary methodologies are emphasized throughout the course, particular attention is given to research planning and logistics, archival investigation, cross-cultural interviewing, participant observation fieldwork training, applied theoretical modelling, and thesis management."
IRST 303 "The Global Irish" "This interdisciplinary course examines the Irish experience of emigration, exile, resettlement, and diaspora, emphasizing the Great Famine and its legacy in shaping Irish communities in Canada and elsewhere. It highlights debates about the impact of the Famine, the significance of Grosse-le in Irish and Irish-Canadian cultural memory, the relationship between Irish emigration and nationalism, immigrant women and how Irish communities adopted a self-image of exile."
IRST 304 "Sexualities in the Irish Diaspora" "This course investigates the rich history that sex and sexual identities have played in shaping the Irish Diaspora over the past 200 years. Representations of Irish sexualities and gendered expectations have been a controversial constant in the story of the Irish abroad and their descendants in the global Irish Diaspora. Key themes may include marriage and divorce, homosexuality, asexuality, racism, virginity, media scandals, heroism, alcoholism, sexual assault, nationalism, propaganda, punishment, gender-bending, and religion."
IRST 312 "(also listed as HIST 330)" ""
IRST 314 "Independent Ireland from the Civil War to the Celtic Tiger " "This course examines political, social and cultural life in the post-revolution southern Irish state formed by the Anglo-Irish Treaty (1921) and Irish Civil War. Key themes include state formation and post-civil war politics; Fianna Fil and the republicanization of society; church and state; Irish neutrality and Anglo-Irish relations; the political and social character of De Valeras Ireland; post-war economic and social change; external relations and influences; the Republics responses to Northern Ireland and the post-1968 Troubles; globalization and the rise and fall of the Celtic Tiger economy."
IRST 315 "The Troubles in Northern Ireland " "After surveying the historical roots of the divisions in Northern Irish society, the course traces the successive phases of the prolonged Troubles (1968 to 1998): the Catholic civil rights movement; the period of armed conflict between the IRA, loyalist paramilitaries, and security forces; and the recent peace process, as well as post-conflict issues including power-sharing, peace and reconciliation, and constitutional change. Attention is also given to cultural expressions of the Troubles and its legacies."
IRST 316 "The Irish Revolution, 1913-1923 " "This course explores the political, military, social, and cultural dimensions of the turbulent period in Irish history that dissolved over a century of Anglo-Irish Union and established two new states. The course necessarily focuses on "
IRST 333 "The Irish Language and its Culture II " "Prerequisite: IRST 233; MIRI 290; or permission of the School. Under pressure for over 200 years from the expanding use of English, Irish is still considered by many a crucial underpinning of Irish national identity. This course assumes elementary knowledge of the Irish language as a platform for students to access cultural forms (memoirs, poetry, short stories, sean-ns songs, films) and media such as radio, newspapers, television, and podcasts. In particular, the course examines how language is intimately tied to place and landscape ("
IRST 343 "Cinema in Quebec and Ireland " "This course offers a comparative study of Quebec and Irelands cinema. As cultures, Quebec and Ireland share a history of Catholicism, a relationship with British colonialism, anxiety around language, and unresolved debates about nationalism and state formation. But these points of contact are problematic. This course teases out the complexities and importance of some of these points of contact and divergence so as to engage, in a fully realized way, in a comparative analysis."
IRST 344 "Classics of Irish Theatre " "This course traces a colourful history from the mid-19th century to the present, exploring, amongst other works, the melodramas of Dionysius Boucicault; the pithy plays of Oscar Wilde; the arguably propagandistic work of WB Yeats and Augusta Gregory; the existentialism of Samuel Beckett; the Hiberno-Greek tragedies of Marina Carr; and the Tarantino inspired comedies of Martin McDonagh. Illuminating the politics  national, postcolonial, gendered and global  present in Irish theatre, this course shows that when theatre holds a mirror up to the Irish nation, a wider world is reflected back."
IRST 346 "Irish Performance Studies " "Contemporary Irish culture and identity are associated with various images and forms of behaviour. With the aim of exploring contemporary Irish identity in our globalized era, this course examines performances of Irishness  from Montreals St. Patricks Day to alternative queer beauty pageants in Dublin, from history-making Irish political speeches to modern day street protests  and addresses questions of cultural identity, cultural authenticity and cultural evolution."
IRST 347 "Contemporary Irish Theatre " "This course offers a panorama of Irelands vibrant contemporary theatre landscape. It puts the exciting experimental developments of recent years under the spotlight, engaging with Irish drama that blurs the line between reality and fiction, that immerses its audiences in morally challenging worlds, and that pushes the boundaries of theatre as a medium. From the collectively devised works of Charabanc to Verbatim plays about the Northern Irish troubles, from activist theatre to street theatre, this course explores what happens when theatremakers step outside of conventional spaces and working methods to make art for our mediatized, technologized and globalized era."
IRST 354 "Irish Childrens and Young Adult Literature " "This course examines the figure of the child and the teenager in Irish culture through an exploration of Irish childrens literature, texts written for adults such as Patrick McCabes The Butcher Boy, and Irish films that focus on childhood. By focusing on a variety of genres, Irish childhood is explored from a range of perspectives such as the importance of the mythological and fantastic tradition on conceptions of the child and childhood, the significance of place and landscape, the gendering of Irish childhood, and the rise of young adult literature, as well as questions of sexuality, ethnicity, globalization, nostalgia, and national identity."
IRST 371 "Irish Cultural Traditions in Quebec " "Music, song, and dance have consistently acted as conduits for the integration of the Irish immigrants into Qubcois society. This interdisciplinary course explores the history of Irish traditional music in Quebec since the 18th century. Using archive recordings, ballads, and dance music, the course traces the history of Irish settlement in Quebec, and focuses specifically on the diaspora of Irish music makers to the province. In exploring this eclectic soundscape, particular emphasis is given to Irish music communities in rural and urban Quebec, from the Gasp through Quebec City and Montreal, to the Gatineau and Ottawa Valleys."
IRST 373 "Irish Traditional Music in Canada: A Cultural History " "The cultural history of Irish traditional music in Canada is inextricably linked to a matrix of Irish immigration and settlement that began in the late 1600s and that stretched from Newfoundland to the Yukon, from Hudson Bay to the Great Lakes, evidenced in music played by Irish, French, Scottish, and First Nation communities across Canada today. Exploring the music history of the Irish in the Atlantic provinces, Lower and Upper Canada, and the Western provinces, this course draws on analytical models in history, anthropology, and cultural studies, as well as ethnomusicology and music criticism."
IRST 390 "Field Studies in Ireland" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a program in Irish Studies, submission of a detailed proposal and permission of the School. This course is designed to allow students to conduct focused study of a given subject (e.g. literature, history, language, music, film) in an Irish context. The experience in Ireland may be in the context of a structured school environment or may take the form of a more independent exploration. Based upon preparatory readings and assignments done at Concordia, students enrich their learning experience in Ireland, followed by assignments completed upon their return to Concordia. All course content and requirements are established in consultation with the School."
IRST 398 "Special Topics in Irish Studies" ""
IRST 399 "Special Topics in Irish Studies" ""
IRST 403 "The Irish in Quebec: Ethnic Fade and Cultural Memory " "Prerequisite: IRST 210 or 303; or permission of the Department. This course examines the role of cultural memory in relation to the adaptation and integration of Irish communities into host societies in Quebec and Canada. An advanced interdisciplinary course, it draws on theoretical and methodological currents in memory studies, historical anthropology and soundscape studies to explore social, cultural and political aspects of the Irish diaspora in Canada and, more specifically, in Quebec since the late-18th century."
IRST 404 "History and Memory in Ireland " "Prerequisite: IRST 211 and 21 credits in Irish Studies; or permission of the Department. This seminar explores the complex and politically charged relationship between history and memory in modern Ireland in the contexts of politics, popular culture, commemoration practices, and scholarship. Drawing on the insights offered by the interdisciplinary field of memory studies, it explores the interactions between past and present and memory and forgetting by tracing the ways key historical events have been historicized, revised, commemorated, and otherwise remembered (and silenced) over time by nationalists, unionists, exiles, and other communities of memory in Ireland and among the Irish Diaspora. Possible memory case studies include the 1641 Rebellion; the Williamite War; the 1798 Rising; the Great Famine; the First World War and the events of the Irish Revolution; the Northern Irish Troubles; and Church-State institutional abuse in independent Ireland."
IRST 412 "Rebellions in Ireland and the Canadas " "Prerequisite: IRST 210 and 211; or permission of the Department. This seminar explores the traditions of rebellion that strikingly marked the histories of Ireland and Canada. The Irish Rising of 1798 and the 1837-38 Rebellions in Upper and Lower Canada involved class struggles, religious tensions, and attempts to define the democratic futures of both nations. Through a variety of readings about the rebellions, students explore their similarities and differences, consider their respective historiographical controversies, investigate the transatlantic links that existed between Irish and Canadian insurrectionists, and reflect upon each rebellions historical legacy."
IRST 498 "Advanced Topics in Irish Studies" ""
IRST 499 "Advanced Topics in Irish Studies" ""
JOUR 205 "Principles of Journalistic Thought and Practice " "This course provides a survey of the foundational ideas about journalism and its role in society, from the time of an emergent press to the present. It addresses received ideas about journalisms place in democratic society as well as current critical thought."
JOUR 206 "Introduction to Reporting" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Journalism program. This workshop course lays the foundation for all subsequent reporting and writing courses. Students learn how to do library and online research, structure and conduct interviews, and write news and feature stories for print and digital outlets. Students learn Canadian Press style."
JOUR 207 "Introduction to Multimedia" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Journalism program. This workshop course introduces students to the use of technology across all digital news platforms, including audio and visual equipment and software. It focuses on the development of the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories. Students are expected to master the use of cameras, recording equipment, and editing software as well as basic digital tools for journalists."
JOUR 208 "Intermediate Reporting" "Prerequisite: JOUR 206 and 207. This workshop course builds on reporting, writing and research fundamentals with increased emphasis on reporting stories in the community. Practical out-of-class assignments focus on the city of Montreal. Students are expected to report on public events, conduct interviews, and write news and feature stories for print and digital outlets."
JOUR 209 "Intermediate Multimedia" "Prerequisite: JOUR 206 and 207. This workshop course expands on technical and editorial fundamentals with increased emphasis on the use of digital news technology in journalistic storytelling. Students also learn the basics of web layout and design, CMS, and writing formats for these news platforms. Students strengthen their skills by producing multimedia stories using the city of Montreal as their focus."
JOUR 210 "The Media in Quebec" "This course considers the current reality of the Quebec news media as they have been informed by the history of journalism in Quebec. The course situates the media in Quebec within broader philosophical and sociological currents informing the understanding of journalism as an institution. Some of the reading material for this course is in French."
JOUR 215 "Contemporary News Media" "This course introduces students to the increasingly complex structures of modern media, and considers them in the context of journalism ideals. It examines the organizations, practices and problems of news media, focusing on key functions in day-to-day activities. In any given year, it may explore in detail a particular development or problem in the news media."
JOUR 216 "Law and Ethics in Journalism " "Prerequisite: JOUR 206 and 207. This course looks at issues and practices in journalism within the contexts of law and ethics. It aims to provide students with an understanding of professional standards and legal norms, together with a strong foundation in ethical reasoning."
JOUR 298 "Special Topics in Journalism" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
JOUR 302 "Reporting and Research Methods for Journalism " "Prerequisite: JOUR 206, 207, 208 and 209. This course introduces students to research methods with a particular focus on primary sources, such as official documents, legal and financial records, access-to-information requests, electronic databases, as well as in-depth interviews. These methods are treated as both sources of story ideas and as essential elements of good reporting."
JOUR 303 "Feature Writing" "Prerequisite: JOUR 206, 207, 208 and 209. This workshop course is designed to help students develop and enhance their writing abilities, preparing for the broadest range of long-form journalism, from brief colour stories and profiles to in-depth and long-form articles. It consolidates interview techniques and introduces a variety of writing approaches, including long-form journalism."
JOUR 309 "Editing and Page Design " "Prerequisite: JOUR 206, 207, 208 and 209. This workshop course develops students copy-editing skills and introduces them to the fundamentals of page layout. While the editing component of the course is designed primarily for students in journalism, the techniques employed are applicable to all media forms."
JOUR 310 "Gender, Diversity and Journalism" "Prerequisite: 30 credits or permission of the Department. This course focuses on gender and diversity issues in journalism, ranging from the historical context to more contemporary material. It addresses the ways in which gender and diversity affect journalism as both a practice and an institution."
JOUR 321 "Visual Journalism" "Prerequisite: JOUR 206, 207, 208 and 209. This workshop course advances video and photography skills already introduced, including those involved in all forms of digital newsgathering. Students refine reporting, writing, recording and editing skills in a visual production context to produce editorially sound and aesthetically acceptable stories."
JOUR 325 "Social Media and Mobile Reporting" "Prerequisite: JOUR 206, 207, 208 and 209. This workshop course emphasizes the professional and ethical use of social media and mobile technology to report on current affairs topics. Students are expected to use all forms of social media to report on the community."
JOUR 330 "Radio Newsroom" "Prerequisite: JOUR 207 and 209. This workshop course replicates the working conditions and journalistic expectations of a radio newsroom. Students assume various journalistic positions, including assignment editor, reporter, and newsreader, working to deadline to produce a live radio newscast."
JOUR 335 "Alternative Journalism " "Prerequisite: 30 credits or permission of the Department. This course considers the alternative news organizations in a variety of media forms. It examines both historical and contemporary examples in the context of an expanding and diversifying media landscape."
JOUR 398 "Special Topics in Journalism" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
JOUR 402 "Specialist Reporting" "Prerequisite: JOUR 302 or permission of the Department. This workshop course focuses on a specified topic area and introduces students to the particular beat reporting and analytical demands of the topic and the institutions that form the basis of this reporting specialty."
JOUR 404 "Magazine Writing" "Prerequisite: JOUR 303 or permission of the Department. This workshop is designed for those students who want to further develop a set of research and writing skills geared specifically to the magazine market. Students produce magazine articles of publishable quality and shape the stories to fit the needs of a particular magazine by studying the overall market in depth."
JOUR 421 "Advanced Video Journalism" "Prerequisite: JOUR 321. This workshop course focuses on studio and field production of public affairs programming. Students produce long- and short-form video journalism, contributing to the Departments Digital Magazine and to their professional portfolio. Students learn basic studio production techniques."
JOUR 432 "Documentary Video and Radio" "Prerequisite: JOUR 321. This workshop course is for students who wish to explore long-form journalism in sound and pictures, in particular, the television or radio current affairs documentary. Through assignments, class discussions, and exposure to notable examples of the form, students learn the fundamentals of long-form documentary news production."
JOUR 436 "Citizen Journalism " "Prerequisite: 60 credits or permission of the Department. This course considers the challenges to mainstream journalism and addresses the particularities of citizen journalism, including its sourcing and presentation strategies, and organizational structures. Students learn how to apply basic technologies involved in citizen journalism."
JOUR 437 "Turning Points in Journalism History" "Prerequisite: 60 credits or permission of the Department. By concentrating on seminal moments reflected in a range of news media forms, this course examines technological, socio-cultural, political, and historical trends that have contributed to journalisms development as a set of complex practices. Special attention is given to innovative journalists who have advanced the field."
JOUR 442 "International Journalism" "Prerequisite: 60 credits or permission of the Department. This course examines cross-cultural journalism practices as they pertain to both international news coverage and local reporting in a multicultural setting. The course asks students to apply basic theoretical concepts to case studies of the news."
JOUR 443 "The Digital Magazine" "Prerequisite: 6 credits from JOUR 404, 421, 432 or 445. This capstone course requires students to produce the Departments Digital Magazine. The course replicates the working conditions and journalistic expectations of a digital newsroom. Students are expected to work in editorial teams to create current and updated multimedia content throughout the term."
JOUR 444 "Critical Approaches to Journalism" "Prerequisite: 60 credits or permission of the Department. This course introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. By interrogating specific readings, students are encouraged to consider the journalist as a cultural producer operating within overlapping social, political, and economic contexts."
JOUR 445 "Advanced Photojournalism" "Prerequisite: JOUR 321. This workshop course expands on the photojournalism fundamentals, where students apply their knowl-edge of theory and aesthetics of long- and short-form news photography. Students use digital cameras and other technologies to complete coursework and to master the professional techniques of news photography."
JOUR 450 "Journalism Practicum " "Prerequisite: 60 credits and enrolment in a Journalism program. Students who have demonstrated ability, near the end of their program, undertake a practicum at a recognized media outlet, under the supervision of a senior journalist and with permission of the Departments undergraduate program director."
JOUR 451 "Independent Study" "Prerequisite: 60 credits and enrolment in a Journalism program. Students who have demonstrated ability may, near the end of their program, undertake an independent study on a topic not otherwise covered by the program, under the direction of one or more faculty members."
JOUR 463 "Literary Journalism" "Prerequisite: 60 credits or permission of the Department. This course explores the literary value of selected, seminal journalistic writings by examining the work of journalists, both past and present, as well as other non-fiction writers, including those in Canada, U.S., U.K., and elsewhere. Students will appreciate how literary styles and conventions can enhance journalistic practices."
JOUR 498 "Advanced Special Topics in Journalism" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
LBCL 201 "Great Books: Western History and Thought from Antiquity" " through the Renaissance"
LBCL 202 "Great Books: Western Culture and Expression from Antiquity" " through the Renaissance"
LBCL 203 "Great Books: Western History and Thought from the Reformation" " through Modernity"
LBCL 204 "Great Books: Western Culture and Expression from the Reformation" " through Modernity"
LBCL 291 "Structure and Dynamics of Western Civilization I" "Prerequisite: Registration in the Liberal Arts College, or permission of the College. This course emphasizes the intellectual, cultural, and political traditions from the Biblical period and classical antiquity to the mid-17th century. Texts studied are related to changing social and historical contexts. Primary sources may include "
LBCL 292 "Modes of Expression and Interpretation I" "Prerequisite: Registration in the Liberal Arts College, or permission of the College. A study of major Western literary, religious, and philosophical traditions, involving the reading and interpretation of significant texts from antiquity to the mid-17th century. Emphasis is placed on development of writing skills and interpretative analysis. Primary texts may include Homer, "
LBCL 295 "History of Art" "Prerequisite: Registration in the College, or permission of the College. This course is an integrated study of the nature of the visual arts from antiquity to the 20th century. Artistic expression is examined through chronological and thematic approaches, with attention to the relation between art and society."
LBCL 298 "Liberal Arts College Selected Topics" ""
LBCL 299 "Liberal Arts College Selected Topics" ""
LBCL 390 "History of Music: Ancient to Classical " "Prerequisite: LBCL 291; LBCL 292; LBCL 295; or permission of the College. This course introduces developments in the history of European music from antiquity to the 18th century. Course content includes musical structure, period styles, and selected works by major composers, setting these within their historical contexts."
LBCL 391 "Structure and Dynamics of Western Civilization II" "Prerequisite: LBCL 291; LBCL 292; LBCL 295; or permission of the College. This course emphasizes the intellectual, cultural, and political traditions from the mid-17th century to 1914. Texts studied are related to changing social and historical contexts. Primary texts may include Spinoza, "
LBCL 392 "History of Music: Classical to Contemporary " "Prerequisite: LBCL 291; LBCL 292; LBCL 295; or permission of the College. This course introduces developments in the history of European music from the 18th century to the present day. Course content includes musical structure, period styles, and selected works by major composers, setting these within their historical contexts."
LBCL 393 "Modes of Expression and Interpretation II" "Prerequisite: LBCL 291; LBCL 292; LBCL 295; or permission of the College. A study of major Western literary, religious and philosophical traditions from the mid-17th century to 1914. Primary texts may include Stendhal, "
LBCL 394 "The History of Science: Antiquity to the Renaissance" "Prerequisite: LBCL 291; LBCL 292; LBCL 295; or permission of the College. This course explores the history of science from antiquity to the Renaissance. Primary sources may include Aristotle, "
LBCL 395 "The History of Science: Early Modern to Contemporary " "Prerequisite: LBCL 291; LBCL 292; LBCL 295; or permission of the College. This course emphasizes the nature of modern science from the scientific revolution to the present day. Primary sources may include Darwin, "
LBCL 398 "Liberal Arts College Selected Topics" ""
LBCL 399 "Liberal Arts College Selected Topics" ""
LBCL 490 "The 20th Century: Forms, Themes, Critiques" "Prerequisite: LBCL 391; LBCL 393; or permission of the College. This course emphasizes key issues in contemporary society and culture. Major 20th-century texts and documents  philosophical, literary, political, and artistic, as well as analytical materials drawn from history and the social sciences, are read. Primary sources may include de Beauvoir, "
LBCL 491 "Integrative Seminar" "Prerequisite: Permission of the College. Students who have received credit for LBCL 490 may register for LBCL 491 provided the subject matter is different."
LBCL 494 "" " Renaissance/Reformation "
LBCL 495 "Liberal Arts College Special Studies: 17th Century to the Present " "Prerequisite: Permission of the College. This course addresses a selected field within the chronological period above, emphasizing focused study of specific primary texts, as well as significant works of interpretation as appropriate to the selected field. Themes normally vary on a year-to-year alternating basis, so as to reflect the broad orientations (Structures and Dynamics of Western Civilization, Modes of Expression and Interpretation) which inform the core curriculum."
LBCL 496 "" "Prerequisite: This course is open only to students at the College who have completed Stage II courses at the required academic level of performance. The student works with an individual faculty member in a chosen and approved area of the core curriculum, and must produce a sustained piece of written work approximately 40 pages in length. Students must also participate in an honours seminar in connection with their research and writing."
LBCL 498 "Liberal Arts College Advanced Topics" ""
LBCL 499 "Liberal Arts College Advanced Topics" ""
LOYC 201 "The Idea of Modernity" "The fundamental ideas and assumption of the modern Western world were formed in the 17th-century European Enlightenment. This course begins with an historical overview of the Enlightenment, followed by an interdisciplinary investigation of the idea of modernity. It focuses on the central modern concepts of a person, society, nature, and good and evil, and looks at some challenges to the idea of modernity. Finally, it explores current pressures that have led to the contemporary form of thought known as postmodernism."
LOYC 202 "What is the Environment?" "The purpose of this course is to explore the broad set of interdependent phenomena that comprise the environments in which people live. These are: a) the natural environment of rocks, air, water, plants, and animals; b) the built environment including characteristics of cities, workplaces, and homes; and c) the cultural environment including the beliefs, attitudes, and institutions that affect how people perceive and behave in the environment."
LOYC 205 "(also listed as BIOL 205)" " Introduction to Sustainability"
LOYC 210 "The 20th Century" "This course provides select coverage of aspects of the historical forces and events that shaped the 20th century. The historical background of issues such as wars and peace, colonialism and postcolonialism, economics and the environment, and questions about ethnic and national diversity and cultural perception are explored. The course is intended to develop critical thinking together with basic bibliographic and writing skills."
LOYC 220 "The Contemporary World" "From a variety of perspectives, including historical, environmental, economic, and cultural, this course examines major issues facing the world today. These issues may include international trade and the economy, the regulation of garbage and pollution, the decline in cultural variability, the spread and control of disease, and the effects of mass communication. This course is intended to develop an appreciation of a global view of the challenges which the world is likely to face in the next few decades."
LOYC 230 "Globalization and Diversity" "This course explores the main differences between the worlds major cultures, religious beliefs, and philosophies, and addresses the tensions between establishing universal values and maintaining cultural diversity in an age of accelerating globalization. There is also an emphasis on the conception of different levels of social complexity, principally the role of the individual, the interpersonal, and the group within a society. This course is intended to develop team research and presentation skills, and the ability to communicate and work effectively within a small group setting."
LOYC 240 "(also listed as POLI 208)" " Global Environmental Issues and Ecological Justice"
LOYC 298 "Selected Topics in the Loyola College for Diversity and Sustainability " "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
LOYC 310 "Science and the Contemporary World" "This course explores the basic issues of the philosophy of science by examining the nature of science as an activity and a way of understanding the world. Cultural variations in the philosophy of science are discussed as well as contemporary disputes involving the interpretation of science: Darwinism; the Science Wars; science and religion; and feminist critiques of science. This course is intended to develop critical thinking and analysis, and deductive and inductive reasoning."
LOYC 320 "Biodiversity on Earth" "The current state of biodiversity around the world and the forces that affect this diversity are the main focus of this course. It addresses the origins of this diversity, the advantages of variability in the environment for human life, and the contemporary challenges to this diversity. This course is intended to emphasize holistic thinking and system analysis."
LOYC 330 "Self, Culture, and Development" "This course examines, from a psychological perspective, how the concept of self varies across cultures. Whereas some cultures embrace the concept of the individual, other cultures emphasize the communal nature of social and personal existence. This theme is explored from several perspectives including theory about development, the treatment of self in literature, cultural variations in the concept of human rights, and the link between self and society. This course is intended to demonstrate the interface between the medical and social sciences and the analysis of change."
LOYC 340 "Culture and Communication" "This course is an anthropological approach to variations in cultural experience as they relate to communication. Students explore modes of expression and communication, including literature and film, with a view to examining questions of interpretation, aesthetics, and ethical judgment. Personal expression and communication are also discussed. This course is intended to develop an awareness of the role of imagination and creativity in expression and interpretation, and sensitivity to the role of cultural and other differences in processes of communication."
LOYC 350 "Internship in Sustainability" "This course offers students hands-on experience working on a sustainability-related project for approximately 120 hours. This internship course is designed to give students practical experience to complement other courses in the Minor in Sustainability Studies."
LOYC 398 "Selected Topics in the Loyola College for Diversity and Sustainability " "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
LOYC 420 "Integrative Project" "Prerequisite: 12 credits of LOYC courses; or permission of the College. This course focuses on the conceptualization of cross-disciplinary inquiry and the intersections of theory and practice. In consultation with a College advisor, this course allows students to acquire the necessary skills to complete a high-level research paper or to complete and report on an internship in the community."
MANA 201 "Introduction to Business and Management " "This course introduces students to the basic principles of management within a contemporary business context. The managerial process is explored in relation to issues such as organizational structure and innovation in large and small organizations, strategy formulation and planning, operations and marketing management. Students are exposed to in-depth industry and market analysis methods and do research pertaining to their chosen industry. The course includes basic readings in management and contemporary text from business publications. Particular focus is placed on entrepreneurship and its impact and value on economic and social systems."
MANA 202 "Human Behaviour in Organizations " "This course seeks to give students an understanding of behaviour in the workplace, the factors that influence behaviour, and the relationships among these factors. Conceptual frameworks, case discussions, and self-assessment tools complement the course material. Topics include personality and learning, motivation, group dynamics, teamwork and diversity, influence and leadership, and stress management."
MANA 298 "Business Law " "This course allows students to develop a degree of familiarity with the legal environment in which business organizations operate. Students are introduced to the topics of employment law, the Quebec Charter of Human Rights, representation and power of attorney, corporate law, contract law, civil liability and product safety, as well as other important legal aspects of business."
MANA 300 "Entrepreneurship: Launching Your Business " "Prerequisite: ADMI 201 or ADMI 202 or MANA 201 or permission of the Department; completion of 60 credits in a non-business program. This final-year course offers students the opportunity to learn how to capitalize on their domain-specific knowledge and recognize opportunities for self-employment or new venture creation. The course presumes that students have already developed an interest in entrepreneurial careers within their respective fields of study. The first phase of the course reviews fundamental concepts and issues in entrepreneurship and related business fields. The second phase introduces students to the elements of business planning in the context of entrepreneurial projects, followed by the third phase where students formulate their own business plans."
MANA 341 "Organization Theory and Design" "Prerequisite: COMM 222. This course provides the student with a basis for understanding and critically examining complex organizations in contemporary society. Interrelationships among the social, cultural, and formal properties of organizations are examined and linked to contextual forces in the external environment. Emphasis is placed on the analysis of organizational systems for the purpose of improving integration, adaptation, survival, and effectiveness of organizations."
MANA 343 "Communication and Negotiation" "Prerequisite: COMM 222 previously or concurrently; or MANA 201 and 202. This course focuses on the communication skills that lead to successful interaction with others in business settings. Topics include designing and delivering effective written and oral messages, communicating with internal and external stakeholders, negotiating, and resolving conflict. Pedagogical methods include in-class exercises, case studies, presentations, and report writing."
MANA 362 "Human Resource Management" "Prerequisite: COMM 222; or MANA 201 and 202. This course provides a background in the theory and practice of human resource management. It covers the core areas of human resource management, mainly human resource planning, recruitment, staffing, performance appraisal, career planning, labour relations, compensation, and international human resource management."
MANA 366 "Industrial Relations and Collective Bargaining (3 credits)" "Prerequisite: COMM 222. This course provides a broad overview of the employee-employer relationship. It describes the interplay between the various actors of industrial relations: unions, employees, employers, government, and legislators. The course focuses on major labour-management issues and the day-to-day problems of negotiating and administering collective agreements."
MANA 369 "Business and Sustainability" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. This course explores the role of business in developing a sustainable global society. Students explore current environmental and societal concerns and the role of business in influencing them. Students learn how the relationships between business and various stakeholders, including communities, governments, and the natural environment, can create opportunities for generating economic, environmental, and social value."
MANA 374 "Sustainable Management " "This course focuses on the emerging business environment, and how organizations implement ecologically, socially, and economically sustainable management. Sustainable strategies are explored within the context of global economic development, to develop organizational vision, products and processes for achieving long-term sustainable prosperity."
MANA 390 "Honours Seminar in Management I " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Honours in Management program; COMM 315; COMM 320 previously or concurrently; MANA341, 343, 362. This course provides students with an opportunity to carry out an in-depth investigation of a selected business problem in small business management, communication within and beyond the workplace, or related fields. Emphasis is placed on the relevance of current management research findings to managers or employees in business organizations, institutions or industries. Students select a topic related to their area of interest and collect interview or archival data in collaboration with faculty supervisors, or managers in local for-profit and non-profit organizations. Students complete an individual report and give an oral presentation at the end of the term."
MANA 420 "Management Research for Decision Making " "Prerequisite: COMM 222, 215. This course explains the relevance of management research for business and administrative decision making. Topics include conducting employee surveys, observational and interview methods, program evaluation, data analysis and interpretation, and the ethics of gathering information from human participants. Students evaluate the validity of reports of management research, learn to exercise caution in accepting research conclusions, and get hands-on experience with basic research techniques."
MANA 443 "Compensation and Benefits Management" "Prerequisite: MANA 362. This course provides a general knowledge of the concepts, design, methodology, management and administration of compensation and benefit programs within organizations. Major topics include job evaluation, knowledge-based pay, pay for performance, alternative reward systems, government and employer-provided benefit programs. The primary emphasis is on the design of appropriate policies and programs and how these can help support organizational objectives and strategies."
MANA 444 "Training and Development" "Prerequisite: MANA 362. Topics covered in this course include how training needs are assessed, how effective training programs are designed, how to ensure that learning achieved in training is transferred to the work, and how training programs are evaluated. Emerging issues such as career management and mentoring programs are discussed."
MANA 445 "Health and Safety Management" "Prerequisite: MANA 362. This course examines the critical aspects of health and safety administration within organizations. It provides a brief overview of the relevant legislation and focuses upon prevention, causes, detection, intervention, reintegration, epidemiological and clinical investigation, and health development. Physical and psychological aspects of health and safety are examined."
MANA 446 "Workplace Planning and Staffing" "Prerequisite: MANA 362. This course is designed to introduce the conceptual and analytical tools needed to staff organizations effectively with qualified employees. Topics include planning, job analysis, legal issues, recruitment, selection methods, and techniques for developing valid and reliable selection procedures. Both the strategic needs of the organization and the legal environment of contemporary organizations in Quebec and Canada are addressed."
MANA 447 "Leadership and Motivation" "Prerequisite: COMM 222. This course is designed to familiarize students with current research and theory on motivation and leadership, and their synergy and application in a work context. Implications for the design of reward systems and leader development are addressed. Class activities include student presentations, small group discussions, exercises, cases, and simulations."
MANA 451 "Managing a Small Business" "Prerequisite: COMM 320 or 410. This course emphasizes the operational aspects of management that are uniquely important to a small enterprise. It provides opportunity to practise operational decision-making under conditions characteristic for small- and medium-sized firms. Themes include strategy and planning, human resource management, marketing, operations and technology, managing the small family business, legal issues and international activities."
MANA 461 "Implementing Competitive Strategies" "Prerequisite: COMM 401. Bridging the gap between the classroom and the practical day-to-day running of a contemporary business enterprise, this course explores the process by which strategy is linked to managerial action. Corporate strategy states the general direction that the organization will follow. Functional strategy is a formulation of how the business unit intends to compete in its given business sector. The course examines how functional strategies can be key instruments for the realization of business and corporate strategies."
MANA 463 "Strategic Human Resource Management" "Prerequisite: MANA 341, 362, and any two of the following: MANA 443, 444, 446. This course is a final-year integrative seminar for Human Resource Management Majors. It focuses on the philosophies underlying current human resource management principles and policies and the processes of their implementation. The course utilizes cases to integrate human resource management areas such as recruitment, selection, training, performance appraisal, compensation, and benefits administration."
MANA 466 "(also listed as IBUS 466)" " Management of Multinational Corporations"
MANA 477 "Real Estate Law" "Prerequisite: COMM 315. This course introduces students to the basics of Canadas legal system and the real estate industry. It covers major areas of real estate law including real property rights, property ownership, real estate transactions, contracts, tax aspects and financing of real estate. This course may include topics such as land regulation, urban planning and environmental issues associated with real estate development and management."
MANA 478 "Entrepreneurial Company Law" "Prerequisite: COMM 315. Since many business enterprises are operated as corporations, it is important to familiarize students with the legal aspects involved in creating and managing a corporation. This course is aimed at both students who wish to set up new business enterprises and at those who wish to manage existing businesses effectively. Students study the legal process through which a corporation is set up, and examine strategically important issues relating to the control and voting of shares, unanimous shareholders agreements, the duties and liabilities of shareholders, directors, and officers, the sale of shares and the protections provided by law to minority shareholders. The Canada Business Corporations Act (C.B.C.A.) along with other related laws, actual court cases and sample legal documents are studied."
MANA 479 "Employment Law" "Prerequisite: COMM 315. This course familiarizes students with important legal issues associated with labour management through the study of the laws and relevant court cases dealing with the rights and obligations of employers and employees, labour standards, certification of unions, strikes, lock-outs, grievances, and arbitration. This course focuses primarily on the labour laws of Quebec, while examining Canadian labour issues."
MANA 480 "Entrepreneurial Family Business " "Prerequisite: COMM 320. Family businesses are the predominant form of business in the world. Almost 80 per cent of new ventures are born as family firms and over 65 per cent of all Canadian firms are family firms. In these firms, family members significantly influence the business including its creation, continuity, mode and extent of growth, and exit. This course prepares students to work effectively and professionally in and with family firms to launch and create cross-generational wealth in family firms."
MANA 481 "Management Consulting " "Prerequisite: COMM 401 previously or concurrently. This course focuses on the management consulting profession and process. It offers an examination of the different phases of the consulting process and a reflection on the role of internal consultants and the choice of management consulting as a career. It focuses on the understanding and development of core consulting skills which are essential for any type of consulting engagement, whether one works as an external or internal consultant, and whether the client is a large, medium, or entrepreneurial company, public or non-profit sector organization. A major component of the course is a real-world consulting project that students conduct with a client firm."
MANA 482 "Financing of Entrepreneurial Ventures " "Prerequisite: COMM 320. The course objectives are to understand the nature of the financing problem at various stages of business growth; to analyze the advantages and disadvantages of different sources of funding, including internal sources, informal sources, commercial banks, government, business angels, venture capital, and going public; and to appreciate the key elements that go into the structuring of the deal between entrepreneurs and finance providers."
MANA 490 "Honours Seminar in Management II " "Prerequisite: Completion of 60 credits in a business program including MANA 390, 420 and any two of the following: MANA 369, 451, 478, 481. This course provides students with an opportunity to carry out an in-depth investigation of a selected business problem in small business management, sustainability, family business or related fields. In this applied learning experience, students select a topic related to their area of interest and carry out a research project in collaboration with faculty supervisors, or managers in for-profit and non-profit organizations. Students carry out the project using the appropriate methodology, write a research report, and give an oral presentation at the end of the term. The course allows students to develop their skills while providing a useful service to practitioners, deepening their understanding of key areas in management, and building a career-enhancing professional network."
MANA 493 "(also listed as IBUS 493)" " International Business Law"
MANA 498 "Special Topics in Human Resource Management" "Prerequisite: MANA 362, and any two of the following: MANA 443, 444, 446.This course is intended to complement and supplement human resource management (HRM) courses taken previously or concurrently. It offers flexibility in content that enables an emphasis on contemporary HRM literature and issues."
MANA 499 "Special Topics in Management" "Prerequisite: Written permission of the Department. Intended to complement and supplement business courses taken previously or concurrently, this course emphasizes business literature and modern thought. Students are encouraged to work independently on research topics of interest to them. Students repeating MANA 499 register for credits under MANA 498."
MARK 201 "Introduction to Marketing" "This course introduces non-Commerce students to the managerial concepts and practices of marketing. The process of developing a marketing strategy is examined along with the factors and interrelationships related thereto. Readings and cases are used to help students apply these concepts in a variety of business settings."
MARK 301 "Marketing Management II" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. This course focuses on the management of marketing in organizations. Target market selection and each component of the organizations offer bundle are scrutinized. The course is application-oriented. Additionally, cases are used in order to reinforce learning and to help each student cultivate excellent problem-solving and decision-making skills. Other areas in which marketing can be applied are introduced."
MARK 302 "Marketing Research" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. The role of research in the marketing process, the role of models, and the development of measurement techniques are discussed. Emphasis is placed on the nature and scope of marketing research methods for obtaining internal and external data, and on the steps and principles involved in gathering and analyzing data. The student is also briefly introduced to applications of marketing research and to the technique involved in conducting a marketing study."
MARK 305 "Consumer Behaviour" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. This course analyzes the motivations, roles, and behaviour of the consumers, how they are affected by economic, social, and cultural influences, and how the marketer may model this behaviour for decision-making purposes."
MARK 451 "Marketing of Services" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. This course explores the challenges of providing outstanding customer service and becoming a recognized "
MARK 452 "e-Marketing" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. This course offers an introduction to e-marketing strategies and tools that are required for effective marketing via electronic media. In particular, this course focuses on conceptualization regarding new media and practical tools, both of which will contribute to students ability to analyze new marketing opportunities arising from new electronic media and to develop an appropriate course of action to leverage their strengths. Topics include online advertising, e-commerce, mobile marketing, social media, search engine optimization, web analytics, and eCRM."
MARK 453 "Marketing Communications " "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201.This course introduces students to the field of marketing communications. The initial part of the course examines the role that communications play in marketing strategy. Then, the specific elements involved in developing and executing an effective promotional campaign such as message strategy, creative execution, media planning and budgeting are examined. Next, the course covers ways to support the promotional campaign through various communication tools, such as sales promotion, Internet marketing, personal selling, publicity and direct marketing. The course ends with a discussion of some of the key legal, ethical and social aspects of marketing communications."
MARK 454 "Personal Selling" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. This course has a dual focus: the cultivation of personal selling skills, and the theoretical and applied aspects of managing the personal selling function. Cases, readings, simulations, and presentations are deployed to achieve the course goals."
MARK 457 "Marketing Channels" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. This course focuses on the different ways in which organizations make their goods and services available for consumption: the inter-organizational system that makes up channels of distribution. Topics covered include why marketing channels exist, the specific nature of channel decisions, design of channel systems, management of relationships among channel members, wholesaling, franchising and direct distribution. The role that the revolution in electronic commerce plays in channels is also examined."
MARK 458 "The Marketing of Food" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. This course introduces students to the structure of the food industry which encompasses various entities including farmers and producers, commodity brokers, importers, distributors, packaged goods manufacturers, transformers, retailers, and restaurants, the operating realities of its key players, and the issues and challenges facing them. Pressing societal issues such as obesity and the need for responsible stewardship over food resources are addressed. The course exposes students to potential solutions as well as new theories and concepts that broaden their marketing knowledge and provide them with the tools to develop solutions to current food marketing challenges. A combination of formal lectures, live case studies, group work, student presentations, in-class exercises, and guest speakers are used."
MARK 460 "Integrated Marketing Communications Practicum" "Prerequisite: MARK 452, 453. This practicum course builds on and supplements the concepts that were covered in MARK 453. It focuses on the application and integration of all the tools of marketing communications such as advertising, sales promotion, public relations and publicity, personal selling, direct marketing, and Internet marketing. The course also takes into account all contact points and stakeholder groups, including consumers, employees and suppliers, governments, distribution channel members, local communities, opinion leaders and the media. An integral component of the course is the development of a complete integrated marketing communications plan for presentation to a real life client using concepts that are discussed in class."
MARK 462 "(also listed as IBUS 462) " " Environment of World Business"
MARK 463 "Retailing" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. This course seeks to apply the theories of marketing and administration to the retail situation. Topics covered include site selection for single and multi-unit retail outlets, organizing and staffing the retail operation, the wholesaler-retailer relationship, consumer behaviour in the retail situation. The impact of such new developments as consumer co-operatives, franchising, discounting, and computer technology on the future of retailing is also considered."
MARK 465 "(also listed as IBUS 465) " " International Marketing Management"
MARK 485 "Business-to-Business Marketing" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. The course focuses on the managerial aspects of industrial marketing. The concept of organization buying behaviour and its impact on marketing strategy formulation are discussed. Management of the industrial marketing mix considering product service development, intelligence, promotion, channels, and performance measurement is covered, both in existing product lines and new product-launch activities."
MARK 486 "Product Strategy and Innovation" "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. The focus of this course is the development of a dynamic and successful product strategy for the organization. Topics covered include product life cycle concepts, the adoption and diffusion of innovations, strategic product planning, developing the service offering, and the process of innovating and launching new products and services."
MARK 491 "Special Topics Seminar " "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. This course focuses on issues of current and potential concern to marketers. The content may vary from year to year."
MARK 492 "(also listed as IBUS 492) " " Cross-Cultural Communications and Management"
MARK 493 "Current Issues in Marketing " "Prerequisite: COMM 223 or 224 or MARK 201. This course focuses on issues of current and potential concern to marketers. The content may vary from year to year."
MARK 495 "Strategic Marketing Planning" "Prerequisite: 60 credits including MARK 301, 302, 305 and six other Marketing credits at the 400 level. This is a holistic, integrative, capstone course directed primarily at cultivating the skills and techniques required for effective marketing planning. Various pedagogical tools including cases, readings, and a major project are deployed to achieve the course goals. Students will develop an actual marketing plan for a product, service, or idea using the concepts and techniques studied throughout their major program."
PHIL 201 "Problems of Philosophy" "In this course, students are introduced to philosophical problems such as: What is the nature of reality? How does one know what is real, and how is it distinct from misleading appearances or illusion? What is knowledge? Does knowledge require certainty? How is knowledge distinct from belief? Are people free? That is to say, do they choose their actions or are their actions determined by causes beyond their control? If people are not free, then how can they be held responsible for their actions? Can Gods existence be proven? How is the mind related to the body, if at all? What is it to be a morally good person?"
PHIL 210 "Critical Thinking" "This course is an introduction to argumentation and reasoning. It focuses on the kinds of arguments one is likely to encounter in academic work, in the media, and in philosophical, social, and political debate. The course aims to improve students ability to advance arguments persuasively and their ability to respond critically to the arguments of others. Students will find the skills they gain in this course useful in virtually every area of study."
PHIL 214 "Deductive Logic" "This course presents the modern symbolic systems of sentential and predicate logic. Students transcribe English sentences into a logical form, analyze the concepts of logical truth, consistency, and validity, as well as learn to construct derivations in each system."
PHIL 216 "Introduction to the Philosophy of Language" "This course provides an introduction to the main problems in the philosophy of language, concerned with the analysis of the concepts of meaning, reference, truth, necessity."
PHIL 220 "Introduction to the Philosophy of Science" "This course provides an introduction to the main problems in the philosophy of science. These include the structure of scientific theories, various models of scientific method and explanation, and the existence of unobservables."
PHIL 226 "Introduction to Philosophy of Mind" "This course examines philosophical problems about mind, and competing solutions. Topics may include: How does the mind relate to the brain or body? Could computers think? How can one know what other minds are thinking? What is the nature of conscious experience? Which animals are conscious? What determines what ones thoughts are about?"
PHIL 232 "Introduction to Ethics" "Philosophical discussions of ethics have both practical significance (What should one do?) and theoretical interest (What does it mean to say Thats the right thing to do?). In this course, students are introduced to some representative approaches to ethical thought and action. General questions about the nature of ethical reasoning are also considered. For example: Are there objective ethical truths or are ethical judgments merely relative to social norms? An effort is made to incorporate those ethical issues which are of specific importance to contemporary society."
PHIL 233 "Applied Ethics" "This course focuses on ethical theory and its application to contemporary issues. The course covers central ethical theories such as virtue ethics (Aristotle), deontology (Kant), and utilitarianism (Mill). It applies these theories to contemporary moral issues such as humans relation to the environment and nonhuman animals, abortion, consumerism, the use of recreational drugs, the rationing of health-care resources, and national and international distributive justice."
PHIL 234 "Business Ethics" "The purpose of this course is to reflect on issues associated with corporate responsibility with a view to identifying and responding to ethical situations, rather than focusing on specific rules of governance."
PHIL 235 "Biomedical Ethics" "This course is primarily concerned with contemporary biomedical debates, many of which are of current social and political significance: euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide, patients rights, animal experimentation, organ donation and transplantation, palliative care, abortion, genetic engineering, and new reproductive technologies."
PHIL 236 "Environmental Ethics " "This course examines recent developments in ethical theories as they are applied to questions of environmental practices. Topics discussed may include the moral significance of nonhuman nature, duties to respond to climate change, economics and sustainable environmental protection, and environmental justice."
PHIL 241 "Philosophy of Human Rights" "This course investigates basic philosophical questions regarding human rights, such as their status between morality and law, their scope and the problem of relativism, the concept of human dignity, their relation to democracy, whether national or cosmopolitan, and the debate over the justifiability and feasibility of socio-economic rights as human rights."
PHIL 255 "Philosophy of Leisure" "Prerequisite: 30 university credits. This course is designed primarily for students in Therapeutic Recreation and Leisure Studies. It consists of an examination of various leisure practices from the point of view of philosophical ideals of human fulfillment that include ethical thinking and reflection on some of the effects of global economic practices of consumption."
PHIL 260 "Presocratics and Plato" "This course is a study of ancient Greek philosophy from its beginnings to Plato."
PHIL 261 "Aristotle and Hellenistic Philosophy" "Prerequisite: PHIL 260, or permission of the Department. This course is an introduction to Aristotle and the main lines of thought in Hellenistic philosophy, including Stoicism, Epicureanism and Scepticism."
PHIL 263 "Introduction to Epistemology" "An introduction to the basic concepts and problems in epistemology, including belief, knowledge, scepticism, perception, and intentionality."
PHIL 265 "Introduction to Metaphysics" "This course is an introduction to metaphysics and the attempt to understand a mind-independent reality. This involves distinguishing those aspects of reality that are dependent on the mind from those aspects that are independent of the mind. For example, are colours mind-independent properties? Are there universal values and if so, are they mind-independent? Is there a God, and if so, what must that God be like?"
PHIL 266 "Introduction to Philosophy of Religion" "This course explores a long philosophical tradition concerned with various issues associated with the idea of God, such as the various proofs for Gods existence, and questions such as: How does the existence of evil affect ones views about God and the nature of God? What is the status of miracles? What are the varieties of religious experience, what is the nature of religious faith? How is one to understand religious language?"
PHIL 275 "From Modern to Postmodern: Philosophical Thought and Cultural Critique" "This course focuses on key developments in modern and postmodern philosophy and their cultural influences. The course provides an introduction to philosophers (such as Kant, Nietzsche, and Foucault) and philosophical movements (such as empiricism, existentialism, and post-structuralism) of the modern era. It also introduces students to the tremendous influence that philosophical theory has had on the arts, on social and political movements, and on virtually every field of study in the humanities and social sciences."
PHIL 285 "Non-Western Philosophy" "This course introduces the student to the philosophical traditions of non-Western cultures. The particular focus differs from year to year."
PHIL 298 "Introductory Topics in Philosophy" ""
PHIL 299 "Introductory Topics in Philosophy" ""
PHIL 316 "Intermediate Logic" "Prerequisite: PHIL 214. This course is intended for students who are interested in extending their knowledge of logic beyond what is taught in an introductory course. Topics may include metatheory, computability, alternative logics or modal logics."
PHIL 317 "Inductive and Abductive Logic" "Prerequisite: PHIL 210 or 214, or permission of the Department. This course introduces approaches to inductive and abductive logic, such as probabilistic approaches. Topics may include classic and new problems for everyday and scientific induction, causal reasoning, the nature of evidence, and how to interpret probabilities."
PHIL 318 "Philosophy of Biology" "Prerequisite: Three credits in Philosophy or permission of the Department. This course examines a variety of philosophical issues in biology. Topics covered may include: fitness, function, units of selection, the nature of species, reductionism, biological explanation of human behaviour and the ethical and epistemological consequences of evolutionary theory."
PHIL 324 "Philosophy of Social Science" "Prerequisite: Three credits in Philosophy or 12 credits in social science, or permission of the Department. This course offers a philosophical examination of the structure and methodology of the social sciences."
PHIL 325 "Philosophical Psychology" "Prerequisite: PHIL 226, or permission of the Department. This course philosophically investigates the psychology of mind and cognition. Example questions: Which model of the minds architecture is best? Could all of psychology eventually be reduced to physics? How do sensory-motor systems and the environment shape cognition? How does one ascribe beliefs and desires to others? How well does one know ones own beliefs?"
PHIL 327 "Kinds of Minds" "Prerequisite: Three credits in Philosophy, or Computer Science, or Psychology, or Biology, or permission of the Department. This course explores human, animal, and artificial minds by combining philosophy, artificial intelligence, and neurobiology. Topics may include: What distinguishes human minds from those of non-human animals? Could robots endowed with human-like sensory systems exhibit mental traits? How do evolution and experience combine to explain the origin of cognition?"
PHIL 328 "Intermediate Philosophy of Science " "Prerequisite: Three credits in Philosophy or permission of the Department. This course provides an in-depth study of the nature of justification in science, theories of scientific explanation, the rationality of theory change, and debates concerning realism and antirealism."
PHIL 329 "Conceptual Revolutions in Science " "Prerequisite: Three credits in Philosophy or permission of the Department. This course examines the philosophical implications of major scientific revolutions. Examples of such revolutions may include the Newtonian revolution and Einsteins theories of relativity."
PHIL 330 "Contemporary Ethical Theory" "Prerequisite: PHIL 232 or 233 or 234 or 235 or 236 or 241, or permission of the Department. This course provides an examination of contemporary ethical theories such as deontology, utilitarianism, virtue theory, feminist ethics, and narrative ethics."
PHIL 333 "Philosophical Ideas in Literature" "Prerequisite: Three credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course presents a comparative approach to philosophical ideas in literature, which may involve authors from different historical time frames, different world views, or different perspectives of a single author."
PHIL 339 "Aesthetics" "Prerequisite: Three credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. A survey of aesthetic theories in philosophy, with particular attention to major developments in the modern and contemporary periods."
PHIL 342 "Political Philosophy" "Prerequisite: Three credits in Philosophy or Political Science, or permission of the Department. This course provides analyses of important political and philosophical concepts such as globalization, nationalism, power, multiculturalism, tolerance, liberty, equality, community, economic justice, and democracy."
PHIL 343 "Philosophy of Law: General Jurisprudence" "This course provides a philosophical study of natural law theory, legal positivism, and legal realism. The associated issues of legal moralism, legal justice, legal obligation and its limits, and legal reasoning are addressed and applied to cases."
PHIL 344 "The Philosophy of Liberalism" "In this course, the student examines several perspectives from which the problem of the relation between law and morality may be treated. Conflicting concepts of law, morality, and the relation of the individual to society are discussed. The problem of authority is examined in relation to issues of civil liberties, civil rights, and the social basis of legal conflicts."
PHIL 345 "Legal Philosophy: Legal Rights and Duties" "This course offers a philosophical study of the nature, sources, and functions of rights and duties. Attention is given to the particular rights associated with contract and property, and their abuse, to duties arising by law alone, to excuses and justifications for failure to fulfill duties, and to enforcement, punishment, and compromise."
PHIL 352 "Philosophy of History" "Prerequisite: Three credits in History or Philosophy, or permission of the Department. An analysis of the nature of historical knowledge and explanation is followed by a study of classical and contemporary attempts to elucidate the meaning of history. Authors may include Augustine, Vico, Kant, Hegel, Marx, Spengler, Popper, Toynbee, Arendt."
PHIL 356 "Philosophy of Education" "This course examines philosophical principles underlying educational theories and problems arising from the practical implementation of those theories."
PHIL 360 "Rationalism" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy including PHIL 260 and 261, or permission of the Department. This course is a study of central aspects of the work of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz, covering metaphysical, ethical and epistemological issues."
PHIL 361 "Empiricism" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy including PHIL 260 and 261, or permission of the Department. This course is a study of central aspects of the work of Locke, Berkeley, and Hume, covering metaphysical, ethical, and epistemological issues."
PHIL 362 "Medieval Philosophy " "Prerequisite: PHIL 260 or 261, or permission of the Department. This course is an introduction to the main lines of thought in medieval philosophy. Thinkers examined may include Augustine, Boethius, Abelard, Anselm, Avicenna, Averroes, Thomas Aquinas, Duns Scotus, William of Occam."
PHIL 364 "Intermediate Epistemology " "Prerequisite: Three credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course presents an intermediate study of major contemporary issues in the theory of knowledge, such as scepticism, nonempirical knowledge, contextualism, virtue epistemology, experimental epistemology, and debates between internalists and externalists concerning justification and knowledge."
PHIL 365 "Intermediate Metaphysics " "Prerequisite: Three credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course presents an intermediate study of major contemporary issues in metaphysics, such as realism vs. anti-realism concerning the external world; mental causation, personhood and theories of human nature; universals, essences and natural kinds."
PHIL 371 "Philosophy of Feminism" "Prerequisite: PHIL 232 or 263, or permission of the Department. This course provides an introduction to some of the central issues in contemporary feminist philosophy. The key arguments in feminist epistemology, feminist ethics, and sex and gender studies are discussed from a variety of perspectives."
PHIL 374 "Kant and 19th-Century Philosophy" "Prerequisite: Six credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course examines Kant and some of the main currents of post-Kantian philosophy, possibly including Hegel and post-Hegelians, the romantic reaction, positivism, and pragmatism."
PHIL 377 "20th-Century Continental Philosophy" "Prerequisite: Six credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course examines 20th-century French and German philosophy. Philosophers examined may include Husserl, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, Foucault, Derrida, and Habermas."
PHIL 378 "American Pragmatism" "Prerequisite: Six credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course provides an analysis of some classical American pragmatists, such as Peirce, Dewey, James and C.I. Lewis, together with exponents of contemporary neopragmatism, such as Putnam, Rorty, and Quine."
PHIL 385 "Marxism" "This course provides a critical analysis of the ideas of Marx and their modern development."
PHIL 387 "Existentialism" "This course acquaints the student with the fundamentals of the existentialist movement as a philosophical perspective. Philosophers considered may include Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, Jaspers, Marcel, and Berdyaev."
PHIL 389 "Epistemology and Ethics in the Digital Age" "This course examines epistemological and ethical implications of digital technologies (e.g. surveillance, artificial intelligence, and big data) in areas such as privacy, power relations, and the generation and sharing of knowledge."
PHIL 398 "Intermediate Special Topics in Philosophy" ""
PHIL 399 "Intermediate Special Topics in Philosophy" ""
PHIL 414 "Advanced Topics in Logic" "Prerequisite: PHIL 214 or permission of the Department. This course presents the fundamentals of an advanced topic in logic."
PHIL 416 "Philosophy of Language" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy or permission of the Department. This course is an advanced study of a central problem in recent philosophy of language."
PHIL 420 "Advanced Philosophy of Science" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course explores advanced topics in the philosophy of science, such as theory change and justification, realism and anti-realism, or reductionism; or specific issues in philosophy of physics or biology, such as evolution and development."
PHIL 425 "Philosophy of Mind: Cognitive Science" "Prerequisite: PHIL 226 or 325 or 327, or permission of the Department. This interdisciplinary course combines the philosophical study of mind with current research in psychology, neuroscience, linguistics, and computer science."
PHIL 430 "Advanced Studies in Ethics" "Prerequisite: PHIL 232 or 330, or permission of the Department. This course offers a study of one or more of the following ethical theories: deontology, utilitarianism, virtue theory, feminist ethics, care ethics, narrative ethics, contractualism, and discourse ethics, with a focus on ethical reasoning and motivation."
PHIL 440 "Advanced Political Philosophy " "Prerequisite: PHIL 241 or 342, or permission of the Department. This course uses selected historical or contemporary writings in political philosophy to treat topics such as those of power, freedom, equality, distributive justice, law, and the boundaries of the political. Specific topics for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
PHIL 441 "(also listed as BIOL 421)" " Philosophical Foundations of Biology"
PHIL 463 "Honours Seminar in Epistemology" "Prerequisite: PHIL 263 or 265 or 364 or 365, and 12 credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course presents an intensive study of major contemporary issues in the theory of knowledge."
PHIL 465 "Honours Seminar in Metaphysics" "Prerequisite: PHIL 263 or 265 or 364 or 365, and 12 credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course presents an intensive study of major contemporary issues in metaphysics."
PHIL 471 "Advanced Topics in Feminist Theory" "Prerequisite: PHIL 371, or permission of the Department. An examination of recent issues in one of feminist ethics, epistemology or metaphysics. Subject will vary from year to year."
PHIL 472 "Advanced Topics in Phenomenology" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course studies themes or topics in recent research in phenomenology, such as nature, life, place, body, mind, illness, and disability."
PHIL 473 "Advanced Topics in Continental Philosophy" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy including PHIL 374 or 377, or permission of the Department. This course focuses on a selected theme or topic within or via the texts of the tradition of continental philosophy. Example topics include language, the world, animality, social or environmental justice, the political, violence, and memory."
PHIL 474 "Current Research Topics in Continental Philosophy" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy including PHIL 374 or 377, or permission of the Department. This course examines recent research on major figures, or relations between major authors, in continental philosophy."
PHIL 475 "Contemporary Issues in Analytic Philosophy" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course addresses work by contemporary analytic philosophers on a chosen topic."
PHIL 480 "Plato" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy including PHIL 260 and 261, or permission of the Department. Selected themes in the major dialogues of Plato are analyzed in depth."
PHIL 481 "Aristotle" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy including PHIL 260 and 261, or permission of the Department. Selected passages from the major works of Aristotle are analyzed in depth."
PHIL 482 "Advanced Topics in Ancient Philosophy" "Prerequisite: PHIL 260, 261. An in-depth study of principal figures or important topics in ancient Greek or Roman philosophy."
PHIL 483 "Advanced Topics in the History of Philosophy " "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course presents an intensive study of selected topics in the history of philosophy."
PHIL 485 "Kant" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course is an intensive study of Kants "
PHIL 486 "Hegel" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course is an analysis of selected themes from Hegels works."
PHIL 487 "Origins of Analytic Philosophy" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course investigates selected philosophical problems and methodologies in the late-19th- and early-20th-century traditions that developed into analytic philosophy."
PHIL 488 "Topics in 20th-Century Analytic Philosophy" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course focuses on figures in 20th-century analytic philosophy and/or the topics that attracted their attention."
PHIL 489 "Phenomenology" "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy, or permission of the Department. This course examines classic themes, texts and methodological issues in phenomenology, typically focusing on the work of figures such as Husserl, Heidegger, and Merleau-Ponty."
PHIL 490 "Continental Philosophy " "Prerequisite: 12 credits in Philosophy including PHIL 374 or 377, or permission of the Department. This course investigates selected philosophical problems and methodologies as they arose in the late-19th- and early-20th-century traditions that came to be called continental philosophy."
PHIL 495 "Honours Essay " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Honours Philosophy; 30 credits in Philosophy. With permission of the Department, an honours student may arrange a tutorial program with a faculty member culminating in a research project not exceeding 40 pages."
PHIL 496 "Tutorial in Philosophy" "(3 credits)"
PHIL 497 "Tutorial in Philosophy" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. See PHIL 496 for description."
PHIL 498 "Advanced Topics in Philosophy" ""
PHIL 499 "Advanced Topics in Philosophy" ""
PHYS 200 "From Particles to Galaxies" "This course covers all the major topics in physics including Galileos role in science, the Newtonian synthesis, optics radiation and absorption of heat, relativity, quantum mechanics, astrophysics and cosmology at a level that a non-science student can grasp. Students in this course are not required to do any mathematical problem solving."
PHYS 204 "Mechanics" "Prerequisite: MATH 203 or equivalent, previously or concurrently. Kinematics, Newtons laws of motion. Statics, dynamics. Conservation of momentum and energy. Rotational motion. Periodic motion. Lectures only."
PHYS 205 "Electricity and Magnetism" "Prerequisite: MATH 203; PHYS 204 or equivalent. Electrical charge and Coulombs law. Electrical field and potential. Capacity, steady state, and transient currents. Electromagnetic induction and alternating currents. Lectures only."
PHYS 206 "Waves and Modern Physics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 204 or equivalent. Simple harmonic motion. Wave propagation. Superposition. Stationary waves. Doppler effect. Interference. Diffraction. Photoelectric effect. Compton effect. Bohrs atom. Radioactivity, fission, fusion. Lectures only."
PHYS 210 "Discoveries in Physics" "A non-mathematical course in physics specifically designed for students who have had little or no experience in physics. This course traces the fundamental ideas from which modern physics has emerged, and attempts to develop insights into the understanding of natural phenomena. Lectures only."
PHYS 224 "Introductory Experimental Mechanics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 204 previously or concurrently, or permission of the Department. This laboratory course covers fundamental experiments in classical mechanics. Experiments include resolution of forces, centrifugal force and conservation of energy, pendulums. Laboratory only, 10 experiments."
PHYS 225 "Introductory Experimental Electricity" "Prerequisite: PHYS 205 previously or concurrently, or permission of the Department. This laboratory course covers fundamental experiments in electricity. Experiments include Kirchhoffs law, resistors in series and parallel, oscilloscope, induction, alternating current. Laboratory only, 10 experiments."
PHYS 226 "Introductory Experimental Waves and Modern Physics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 206 previously or concurrently, or permission of the Department. This laboratory course covers the fundamental experiments in waves and modern physics. Experiments include spectrometer measurements. Newtons rings and measurements involving radioactivity. Laboratory only, 10 experiments."
PHYS 230 "Experimental Physics I" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Physics program; nine credits in Physics previously or concurrently. This course introduces the basic techniques, methods and tools used in experimental physics. Students acquire basic measurement, data analysis and report writing skills through a series of physics experiments, lectures and tutorials. They learn to use electronic instruments, to evaluate the uncertainty of measurements, and to analyze their data with different methods, using proper data analysis software to display and discuss their results correctly through the production of laboratory reports."
PHYS 232 "Methods of Theoretical Physics I" "Prerequisite: MAST 218 previously or concurrently. First-order differential equations, linear and separable equations, integrating factors, applications. Second-order linear differential equations. Fundamental solutions, linear independence, Wronskian. Nonhomogeneous equations, general solution, method of undetermined coefficients, variation of parameters, applications. Power-series solutions of differential equations, examples. Systems of first-order linear equations. Review of linear algebra, diagonalization of matrices, eigenvalues. Lectures only."
PHYS 235 "Object-Oriented Programming and Applications" "Prerequisite: MATH 203, 204. Introduction to problem solving with computers; programming. Basic elements of an object-oriented language; basic data types, objects, expressions, simple programs. Control structures; library functions, one- and two-dimensional arrays. Introduction to mathematics software (Maple and/or Mathematica) and to programming languages (C/C++ and/or Fortran 77). The material is illustrated with simple examples from physics."
PHYS 236 "Numerical Analysis in Physics" "Basic numerical analysis, symbolic and numerical computation and programming with a computer language and/or mathematics software program, curve fitting. Numerical solutions to linear and nonlinear ordinary and partial differential equations, difference equations. Gaussian elimination, LU decomposition, least-square approximation, linear systems of equations. Numerical differentiation and integration."
PHYS 245 "Classical Mechanics" "Prerequisite: MATH 204, 205 or equivalent. Statics of rigid bodies, work and potential functions, motion in uniform field. Particle motion in an accelerated frame, rotation coordinate systems, motion in a resisting medium, small oscillations, damped (harmonic) motion, motion under central forces, mechanics of a rigid body, dynamics of systems of particles, motion of rigid bodies in three dimensions, elements of Lagrangian mechanics. Lectures only."
PHYS 252 "Optics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 206. Wave equation, phasors, EM waves, linear, circular and elliptical polarization, polariscope, Malus law, dichroism, polaroid, polarizing Prism, quarter and half wave plates, wave superposition, interference, Youngs double slit experiment, Michelson interferometer, reflectance and transmittance of thin films, interferometers, dispersion, elements of Fourier analysis, diffraction, single slit diffraction, double slit, Fraunhofer and Fresnel limits, diffraction grating, Fresnel diffraction, instruments, introduction to lasers."
PHYS 253 "Electricity and Magnetism I" "Prerequisite: PHYS 205 or equivalent; MAST 218 or equivalent, previously or concurrently. Electrostatics, Gauss law, electric potential, curl and divergence of fields, capacitance, RC circuits, Laplaces equation, Legendre equation, method of images, multipole expansion, dielectrics, polarization, dipole moments, electric displacement."
PHYS 260 "Introductory Biophysics" "Cell physiology; macromolecules and molecular devices; transmission of genetic information; random walks, friction and diffusion; Reynolds number; entropy, temperature and free energy; entropic forces; chemical forces; self-assembly; membranes; active transport; nerve impulses. Overview of experimental techniques: X-ray crystallography; atomic force, electron and optical microscopies; patch-clamp techniques."
PHYS 270 "Introduction to Energy and Environment" "This course is designed for students who have little or no background in physics. Topics covered include relationship of physics to environment and energy. Concept and definition of work and energy. Interaction of people and inanimate objects with the environment. Heat and chemical energy. Electromagnetic and nuclear energy. Conservation of energy  how it affects everyday life. Sources of energy used on Earth. Solar energy. Production of wind power, water power, solar cells from suns energy, biological uses, biopower. Lectures only."
PHYS 273 "Energy and Environment" "This course studies energy  a critical resource for civilization  and the impact of energy consumption on societies and the environment. Topics include renewable and non-renewable energy sources, the physics of energy including the second law of thermodynamics and the notion of entropy, energy production and distribution, and social and global environmental issues such as pollution, sustainability, climate change, regulation and the future of energy. Lectures only."
PHYS 284 "Introduction to Astronomy" "This course explores current knowledge of the cosmos from the celestial sphere towards the farthest reaches of the universe. The journey begins with a description of planet earth, its place in the solar system, and resulting seasonal changes, tidal movements, and earths precession. Farther out, the solar system, the planets, star clusters, the Milky Way galaxy, and modern strange systems such as black holes, quasars, and supernovae are explored. The physical, theoretical and experimental grounds for understanding are described including Newtons laws, quantum and relativistic theories of light and matter, the science of visual and microwave telescopes, and techniques for discovering the existence of planets in other solar systems are also described. Lectures only."
PHYS 290 "Experimental Electronics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 205, 225 or equivalent. A practical laboratory course in electronics. This course explores the usage of electronic measuring instruments and components. Experiments include power supplies, transistor amplifiers, operational amplifiers, oscillators, audio and radio frequency amplifiers."
PHYS 291 "Experimental Mechanics I" "Prerequisite: PHYS 245 previously or concurrently. A laboratory course in mechanics. Experiments include pendulum, coefficient of restitution, centrifugal force, rotational inertia, inelastic impact."
PHYS 292 "Experimental Mechanics II" "Prerequisite: PHYS 291. A laboratory course in mechanics. Experiments include the use of air tracks to study acceleration, collisions, dissipative forces, and periodic motion. Other experiments include viscosity and surface tension of liquids."
PHYS 293 "Experimental Electricity and Magnetism I" "Prerequisite: PHYS 253 previously or concurrently. A laboratory course in electricity and magnetism. Experiments include motion of electrons in electric and magnetic fields, exponential relaxation, damped oscillations, resonance, non-linearity, negative resistance."
PHYS 294 "Experimental Electricity and Magnetism II" "Prerequisite: PHYS 293. A laboratory course in electricity and magnetism. Experiments include the transistor, amplification and frequency response, transient response and negative feedback, positive feedback and oscillation, periodic structures."
PHYS 295 "Experimental Electronics I" "A practical laboratory course in electronics. Experiments include resistors in series and parallel, voltameter, Ohms law, Kirchhoffs current and voltage laws, Ohmmeter, capacitor, inductor, transformer, rectifiers, voltage doubler, zener diode, power supplies."
PHYS 296 "Experimental Electronics II" "Prerequisite: PHYS 295. A practical laboratory course in electronics. Experiments include oscilloscope, biasing of bipolar transistors, transistor amplifiers, voltage and current regulators, field-effect transistor, oscillators, operational amplifier circuits, audio amplifier, I-F transformer, limiter, amplitude and frequency modulation."
PHYS 297 "Experimental Optics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 252 previously or concurrently. An experimental course in optics. Experiments include diffraction, optical instruments, resonance, and various experiments using lasers. Laboratory only, 10 experiments."
PHYS 298 "Selected Topics in Physics" ""
PHYS 299 "Selected Topics in Physics" ""
PHYS 330 "Experimental Physics II" "Prerequisite: PHYS 230; or PHYS 291, 293, 297. This course builds on the competencies developed in Experimental Physics I, introducing various physics experiments that require a higher level of experimental skills and deeper insight into how an experiment should be conducted. The data analysis required by these experiments is more involved than that of Experimental Physics I. Students develop their scientific communication skills through the production of reports and an oral presentation."
PHYS 334 "Thermodynamics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 204 or equivalent; MAST 218, 219 or equivalent. Equation of state, ideal and real gases, thermodynamic surfaces, first law of thermodynamics, isothermal and adiabatic processes, the energy equation, liquefaction of gases, Carnot engine, second law of thermodynamics, entropy, third law, thermodynamic potentials, Clausius-Clapeyron equation, kinetic theory, equipartition of energy, Van der Waals equation, transport phenomena, probability and thermal distributions. Lectures only."
PHYS 335 "Methods of Theoretical Physics II" "Prerequisite: PHYS 232 or equivalent; MAST 219 previously or concurrently. Function of a complex variable, Fourier series, applications to a vibrating string, heat conduction, Fourier transform, Laplace transform, application to differential equations, delta functions, eigenvalue problems. Lectures only."
PHYS 345 "Advanced Classical Mechanics " "Prerequisite: PHYS 232 or equivalent; PHYS 245 or equivalent; MAST 219. Survey of Newtonian mechanics; DAlemberts principle and Lagrangian formulation; variational formulation and Hamiltons principle. Hamiltonian formulation, canonical transformations, Poisson brackets (connection to quantum mechanics); central force motion; planetary motion; scattering in a central field, dynamics of rigid bodies; Eulers equations; Hamilton-Jacobi theory, applications. Introduction to non-linear mechanics."
PHYS 354 "Electricity and Magnetism II" "Prerequisite: PHYS 253 or equivalent; MAST 219 or equivalent, previously or concurrently. Biot-Savart Law, Amperes law, divergence and curl of B, magnetic vector potential, magnetization, ferromagnetism, electromagnetic induction, motional EMF, inductance, transformer, ac-circuits, Maxwells equations, the wave equation, polarization, reflection and transmission of em waves, rectangular wave guide, half-wave antenna. Lectures only."
PHYS 355 "Electronics" "Basic circuit analysis, network theorems, maximum power transfer, diode characteristics and circuits, power supply designs, transistor characteristics, incremental equivalent circuits, input and output impedance calculations, emitter follower and Darlington amplifiers, power amplifiers, dc stabilization and negative feedback, operational amplifiers, phase detection, frequency multiplier and special circuits. Lectures only."
PHYS 367 "Modern Physics and Relativity" "Prerequisite: PHYS 205, 206 or equivalent. "
PHYS 370 "Nonlinear Dynamics/Chaos/Fractals" "Prerequisite: PHYS 232 or equivalent. One-dimensional flows and maps, bifurcations, two-dimensional flows and maps, phase plane and limit cycles. Lorenz equations, strange attractors, chaos and nonlinearity, deterministic chaos, period doubling, experimental manifestations. Fractals, fractal dimension, examples of chaos and of fractals. Applications in physics, biology, chemistry, and engineering."
PHYS 377 "Quantum Mechanics I" "Prerequisite: PHYS 367. Schrdinger equation, probabilistic interpretation, normalization, expectation values, the uncertainty principle, stationary states, the free particle, infinite square well, the finite square well, the harmonic oscillator, the delta potential, the scattering matrix, vector spaces, postulates of quantum mechanics, operators and eigenvectors, compatible observables, the uncertainty relations, time-evolution of states, Ehrenfests equations, the variational principle, nondegenerate time-independent perturbation theory, degenerate perturbation theory, spherical coordinates and the hydrogen atom, angular momentum, spin, addition of angular momenta."
PHYS 385 "Astrophysics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 284. The stars, stellar atmospheres, motion, interiors, and populations. Variable stars. Nebulae. Radio, X-ray, and infrared sources. The galaxy  population and dynamics. The extragalactic universe. Lectures only."
PHYS 390 "Experimental Digital Electronics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 296 or equivalent. Breadboarding digital circuits; gating a signal; truth tables; decade counter; decoders, demultiplexers, multiplexers and sequencers; light-emitting diodes and LED displays; tristate and open collector outputs; flip-flops, monostable multivibrators; semiconductor memories; registers, binary counters, arithmetic logic units. Laboratory only."
PHYS 391 "Introduction to Experimental Microprocessors and Assembly Language Programming" "Prerequisite: PHYS 235; COMP 212 or equivalent. Eight-bit microprocessor architecture: opcodes, addressing modes, memory mapped I/O, vectored interrupts, etc. The MS/DOS operating system, word processing, Motorola assembly language: pseudocodes, labels, sub-routines, interrupt service routines, structured programming techniques. Cross assemblers, RS232 serial transmission of ASCII and binary data to remote computers. Laboratory only."
PHYS 392 "Experimental Medical Electronics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 290 or 296, or equivalent. A laboratory course in the maintenance and use of medical instruments, including ECG monitor, electrocardiograph, cardio-tachometer, blood-pressure recorder, respiration-rate recorder, and clinical thermometer. The component parts of the instruments are studied first, and then the instruments are constructed and tested. Laboratory only."
PHYS 393 "Experimental Thermodynamics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 334 previously or concurrently. A laboratory course in thermodynamics. Experiments include Clement and Desormes experiment, vaporization, specific heats, liquid nitrogen boiling. Laboratory only, 10 experiments."
PHYS 394 "Experimental Atomic Physics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 226 or equivalent, or permission of the Department. An experimental course in atomic physics. Experiments include the Frank-Hertz experiment, the Zeeman effect, mass spectrometer, and some X-ray work. Laboratory only, 10 experiments."
PHYS 398 "Selected Topics in Physics" ""
PHYS 399 "Selected Topics in Physics" ""
PHYS 435 "Statistical Physics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 334, 367. Statistical concepts, probability, Gaussian probability distribution, statistical ensemble, macrostates and microstates, thermodynamic probability, statistical thermodynamics, reversible and irreversible processes, entropy, thermodynamic laws and statistical relations, partition functions, Maxwells distributions, phase transformation, Maxwell-Boltzmann, Fermi-Dirac, and Bose-Einstein statistics, quantum statistics in classical limit, black-body radiation, conduction of electrons in metal, interacting particle system, lattice vibrations, virial coefficients, Weiss molecular field approximation, Kinetic theory of gases, Boltzman equation. Lectures only."
PHYS 436 "Methods of Theoretical Physics III" "Prerequisite: PHYS 335 or equivalent. Partial differential equations, eigenfunction expansion and finite transforms, Laplace, Poisson, wave and diffusion equations, applications, special functions, boundary value problems, Sturm-Liouville theory, Bessel functions, Legendre and Hermite polynomials, spherical harmonics, Greens function and applications, perturbation theory, variational theory. Lectures only."
PHYS 440 "Computational Methods and Simulations in Physics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 232, 334, 377. The first part of the course fully develops the UNIX/Fortran/C code for problem solving through direct experience with problems in mechanics, electromagnetism, and quantum mechanics. Applications include finite square well, simple pendulum, charge distribution, phase space, anharmonic oscillator, vibrating string, etc. The second part of the course introduces the Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics methods, first-principles calculations for materials, electronic properties, electrodynamics and electrical circuit simulations, and biophysics simulations."
PHYS 443 "Quantitative Human Systems Physiology" "Prerequisite: Open to all in-program Science and Engineering students with a minimum of 45 university credits (not including Cegep-level science prerequisites), or permission of the instructor. This course addresses important concepts of quantitative systems physiology and the physical bases of physiological function in different organ systems. Students become familiar with the structure and functional principles of the main physiological systems, and how to quantify them. These include the nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory and muscular systems. Important biophysical principles and quantitative physiological methods are presented. These include biophysics of muscle contractions, fluid dynamics in the cardiovascular system, respiration gas exchange and neuronal communication, and how the biophysics of neuronal communications can be used to image brain activity."
PHYS 445 "Principles of Medical Imaging" "Prerequisite: Open to all in-program Science and Engineering students with a minimum of 45 university credits (not including Cegep-level science prerequisites), or permission of the instructor. This course introduces the physical principles associated with important medical imaging techniques used in medicine and in neuroscience research. The objective is to cover the whole imaging process in detail starting from the body entities to be imaged (e.g. structure, function, blood flow, neuronal activity), extending to the physical principles of data acquisition and finally the methods used for image data reconstruction. Imaging modalities presented may include X-Ray and Computer Tomography, Magnetic Resonance Imaging, nuclear medicine, ultrasound, electrophysiology and optical imaging techniques."
PHYS 458 "Advanced Electrodynamics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 354, 436. Electrostatic boundary-value problem and Greens function, Maxwells equation, energy-momentum tensor, guided waves, dielectric wave guides, fibre optics, radiation static field, multipole radiation, velocity and acceleration field, Larmors formula, relativistic generalization, radiating systems, linear antenna, aperture in wave guide, Thomson scattering, bremsstrahlung, Abraham-Lorentz equation, Breit-Wigner formula, Greens function for Helmholtzs equation, Noethers theorem. Lectures only."
PHYS 459 "Solid State Physics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 377 previously or concurrently. Drude and Sommerfeld theory of metals, crystal lattices, reciprocal lattice, electron levels in periodic potentials, tight-binding method, semiclassical model of electron dynamics and of conduction in metals, relaxation-time approximation, Boltzmann equation, homogeneous semiconductors, lattice vibrations, Fermi surface, cohesive energy."
PHYS 460 "Chemical Aspects of Biophysics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 253; PHYS 334 previously or concurrently. Stabilizing protein structures; bonding and nonbonding interactions; energy profiles; Ramachandran plot; stabilization through protonation-deprotonation. Interaction of macromolecules with solvents. Thermodynamics of protein folding. Ligand binding, Marcus-theory of biological electron transfer. Examples of modern biophysical techniques: electronic spectroscopies (absorption, fluorescence), X-ray absorption spectroscopy, NMR and EPR spectroscopy, IR and Raman spectroscopy, circular dicroism, differential scanning calorimetry."
PHYS 461 "Membrane Biophysics" "Prerequisite: BIOL 266; PHYS 460. Fluid dynamics; composition of natural membranes; selection criteria for artificial membranes; phases and phase transitions of lipids; lipid-protein interactions; transport mechanisms across membranes; facilitated diffusion, Michaelis-Menten equation, ion channels, active transport against a concentration gradient, ATPase; origin of membrane potentials; electrogenic ion pumps; experimental methods to measure membrane potentials (patch clamp, optical, radioactive); resting and action potentials."
PHYS 462 "Bioenergetics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 460, 461. Chemiosmotic energy transduction, ion transport across energy conserving membranes, quantitative bioenergetics: measurement of driving forces. Chemiosmotic proton circuit, respiratory chains, photosynthesis, photosynthetic generators of protonmotive force, coupling between biological electron and proton transfer reactions, ATP synthase, metabolite and ion transport, mitochondria in the cell."
PHYS 463 "Optical Spectroscopy with Biophysics Applications" "Prerequisite: PHYS 377. Beer-Lambert Law, absorption; fluorescence; pump-probe; photon echo, IR and Raman spectroscopies; linear and circular dichroism; single molecule spectroscopy; spectral hole burning and fluorescence line narrowing. Relevant concepts of quantum mechanics (time-dependent and time-independent Schrdinger equation, spatial wavefunctions, transitions between states and time-dependent perturbation theory, lifetimes and uncertainty principle). Atomic and molecular orbitals. Some concepts related to symmetry and group theory. Resonance energy transfer. Optical properties of molecular aggregates."
PHYS 468 "Condensed Matter and Nanophysics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 377 previously or concurrently; PHYS 459. Review of phonon modes and electron band structure. Quantum condensed-matter topics: Hartree-Fock, mesoscopic quantum transport theory (quantum dots, 1D systems, 2D systems), superconductivity, the quantum Hall effects, and weak localization."
PHYS 470 "Nonlinear Waves" "Prerequisite: PHYS 335. Linear stability analysis and limitations, modulated waves and nonlinear dispersion relations. Korteweg-de Vries, sine-Gordon, and nonlinear Schrdinger equations. Hydro-dynamic, transmission-line, mechanical, lattice, and optical solitons. Applications in optical fibres, Josephson junction arrays. Inverse scattering method, conservation laws."
PHYS 478 "Quantum Mechanics II" "Prerequisite: PHYS 377. Particle states, classification of symmetry, parity, numerical solution of Schrdingers equation, WKB approximation, variational method, alpha decay probability, time-dependent perturbation theory, systems of particles in one dimension, interacting particles, identical particles, Pauli exclusion Principle, Motion in three dimensions, hydrogen atom, angular momentum and spin, Pauli spin matrices, Diracs relativistic wave equation."
PHYS 480 "Directed Readings in Theoretical Physics" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. A course for advanced students in which a special topic, selected in consultation with a faculty member, is studied in depth."
PHYS 488 "Lasers and Fibre-optics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 252, 354. Semiconductor physics, semiconductor sources, detectors, waveguides and fibres, optical communications, assorted topics in electro-optics."
PHYS 491 "Experimental Microprocessor Interfacing" "Prerequisite: PHYS 390; PHYS 391 or equivalent. Address decoding, multiplexing, and demultiplexing with TTL integrated circuits. Address decoding circuits, drivers, and receivers. Parallel, serial and non-TTL I/O. Breadboarding, wire-wrapping, and soldering techniques. The use of oscilloscopes, logic probes, and computers for circuit trouble-shooting. Drawing schematic diagrams. Timing diagrams. Data sheets. Laboratory only."
PHYS 494 "Methods of Experimental Physics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 290, 293, 394 or equivalent, or permission of the Department. A supervised research project which may include experiments in nuclear physics, laser and fibre-optics, solid state physics, ultrasonics, or thermal physics. A technical report is required."
PHYS 495 "Experimental Nuclear Physics" "Prerequisite: PHYS 394. A laboratory course in nuclear physics. Experiments include gamma- and beta-ray spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance, half-life determination, nuclear activities. Laboratory only, 10 experiments."
PHYS 496 "Honours Research Project" "Prerequisite: PHYS 330; or PHYS 290, 291, 293, 297, 394; and enrolment in Honours in Physics; and 45 credits completed in Physics; or permission of the Department. A research project for honours students that is carried out on a special topic in physics, biophysics, or applied physics under the supervision of a faculty member."
PHYS 497 "Specialization Research Project" "Prerequisite: PHYS 330; or PHYS 290, 291, 293, 297, 394; and enrolment in the Specialization in Physics; and 45 credits completed in Physics; or permission of the Department. This is an independent studies course for advanced specialization students in which a special topic in physics, biophysics, or applied physics is studied under the supervision of a faculty member. The student is required to write a report and give a brief presentation."
PHYS 498 "Advanced Topics in Physics" ""
PHYS 499 "Advanced Topics in Physics" ""
POLI 203 "Introduction to Comparative Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 204 "Introduction to Canadian Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 205 "Introduction to International Relations (3 credits)" ""
POLI 206 "Introduction to Western Political Theory (3 credits)" ""
POLI 301 "Social Movements and Protest Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 302 "Causes of War (3 credits)" ""
POLI 303 "Chinese Security Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 304 "Theories of Foreign Policy Making (3 credits)" ""
POLI 305 "International Political Economy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 311 "International Public Law (3 credits)" ""
POLI 312 "Special Topics in International Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 315 "International Organizations (3 credits)" ""
POLI 318 "Introduction to Strategic Studies (3 credits)" ""
POLI 329 "American Foreign Policy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 332 "Theories of International Relations (3 credits)" ""
POLI 388 "Human Rights and International Justice (3 credits)" ""
POLI 391 "Middle East and Global Conflict (3 credits)" ""
POLI 394 "Globalization and Sustainable Development (3 credits)" ""
POLI 400 "Advanced Seminar in International Relations Theory (3 credits)" ""
POLI 402 "Advanced International Political Economy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 403 "Global Ecopolitical Analysis (3 credits)" ""
POLI 404 "International Institutions (3 credits)" ""
POLI 419 "Strategic Studies (3 credits)" ""
POLI 420 "Politics of Conservation (3 credits)" ""
POLI 421 "Transnational Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 422 "Canadian Foreign Policy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 423 "Peace Studies and Global Governance (3 credits)" ""
POLI 486 "Advanced Seminar in International Relations (3 credits)" ""
POLI 301 "Social Movements and Protest Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 307 "The U.S. Presidency (3 credits)" ""
POLI 308 "Politics of Emerging Economies (3 credits)" ""
POLI 310 "Politics of the U.S. (3 credits)" ""
POLI 313 "Special Topics in Comparative Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 319 "European Politics and Government (3 credits)" ""
POLI 320 "Development of Western Legal Systems (3 credits)" ""
POLI 322 "Israeli Political System (3 credits)" ""
POLI 323 "Politics of Eastern Europe (3 credits)" ""
POLI 327 "Comparative Democratization (3 credits)" ""
POLI 331 "Comparative Party Systems (3 credits)" ""
POLI 335 "Politics of the Peoples Republic of China (3 credits)" ""
POLI 352 "Comparative Urban Politics and Government (3 credits)" ""
POLI 366 "Politics of Africa (3 credits)" ""
POLI 379 "Politics of Latin America (3 credits)" ""
POLI 395 "Politics of the Middle East (3 credits)" ""
POLI 405 "Comparative Electoral Systems (3 credits)" ""
POLI 406 "Comparative Federalism and Political Integration (3 credits)" ""
POLI 410 "Environmental Policy in the Developing World (3 credits)" ""
POLI 412 "Comparative Social Policy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 424 "Corruption (3 credits)" ""
POLI 429 "Political Socialization in Canadian and Comparative Perspective (3 credits)" ""
POLI 431 "State-Society Relations in China (3 credits)" ""
POLI 434 "Politics of Violence in Latin America (3 credits)" ""
POLI 435 "Advanced Seminar in U.S. Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 436 "State and Society in the Middle East (3 credits)" ""
POLI 437 "Special Issues in African Development (3 credits)" ""
POLI 438 "Decentralization and Development (3 credits)" ""
POLI 481 "Advanced Seminar in European Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 483 "State and Society in Latin America (3 credits)" ""
POLI 484 "Post-Communist Democracies (3 credits)" ""
POLI 485 "Issues in Development and Democracy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 487 "Advanced Seminar in Comparative Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 309 "Women and Politics in Canada (3 credits)" ""
POLI 314 "Special Topics in Canadian and Quebec Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 321 "Canadian and Quebec Law (3 credits)" ""
POLI 324 "Parliament and the Charter (3 credits)" ""
POLI 334 "Political Participation in Canada (3 credits)" ""
POLI 339 "Quebec Politics and Society/La vie politique qubcoise (3 credits)" ""
POLI 340 "Canadian Political Culture (3 credits)" ""
POLI 341 "Provincial and Territorial Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 351 "Canadian Federalism (3 credits)" ""
POLI 356 "Canadian Political Parties (3 credits)" ""
POLI 363 "Issues in Canadian Public Policy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 365 "Canadian Public Administration (3 credits)" ""
POLI 367 "Quebec Public Administration (3 credits)" ""
POLI 407 "Parliamentary Bills of Rights (3 credits)" ""
POLI 408 "Public Opinion and Public Policy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 409 "Canada: State-Society Relations (3 credits)" ""
POLI 428 "Constitutional Politics in Canada (3 credits)" ""
POLI 429 "Political Socialization in Canadian and Comparative Perspective (3 credits)" ""
POLI 488 "Advanced Seminar in Canadian and Quebec Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 316 "Special Topics in Public Policy and Administration (3 credits)" ""
POLI 320 "Development of Western Legal Systems (3 credits)" ""
POLI 328 "Public Policy and the Politics of Equality (3 credits)" ""
POLI 330 "Principles of Public Administration (3 credits)" ""
POLI 349 "Political and Social Theory and the City (3 credits)" ""
POLI 352 "Comparative Urban Politics and Government (3 credits)" ""
POLI 353 "Principles of Public Policy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 361 "Advocacy Groups and Public Policy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 363 "Issues in Canadian Public Policy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 365 "Canadian Public Administration (3 credits)" ""
POLI 367 "Quebec Public Administration (3 credits)" ""
POLI 410 "Environmental Policy in the Developing World (3 credits)" ""
POLI 411 "Gender and Public Policy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 412 "Comparative Social Policy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 438 "Decentralization and Development (3 credits)" ""
POLI 463 "Government and Business in Canada (3 credits)" ""
POLI 489 "Advanced Seminar in Public Policy and Administration (3 credits)" ""
POLI 306 "Classical Political Thought (3 credits)" ""
POLI 317 "Special Topics in Political Theory (3 credits)" ""
POLI 345 "Contemporary Political Philosophy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 349 "Political and Social Theory and the City (3 credits)" ""
POLI 364 "Hellenistic, Roman, Medieval Political Philosophy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 368 "Media, Technology and Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 371 "Early Modern Political Philosophy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 373 "Late Modern Political Philosophy (3 credits)" ""
POLI 384 "Principles of Political Theory (3 credits)" ""
POLI 386 "Contemporary Liberalism and Its Critics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 389 "Religion and Politics (3 credits)" ""
POLI 401 "American Political Thought (3 credits)" ""
POLI 414 "Authors of Political Imagination (3 credits)" ""
POLI 415 "Modern Political Theory and Religion (3 credits)" ""
POLI 416 "Ancient Political Texts (3 credits)" ""
POLI 417 "Governance (3 credits)" ""
POLI 418 "Machiavelli (3 credits)" ""
POLI 425 "Foundations of Liberalism (3 credits)" ""
POLI 426 "Nietzsche (3 credits)" ""
POLI 427 "Political Thought of the Enlightenment (3 credits)" ""
POLI 433 "Critics of Modernity (3 credits)" ""
POLI 490 "Advanced Seminar in Political Theory (3 credits)" ""
POLI 203 "Introduction to Comparative Politics" "This course introduces students to the main concepts of comparative political analysis. Major topics include different types of governmental systems and institutions, regime types, electoral systems and political parties, state-society relations, political economy, nationalism, democratization, globalization, and other types of political transformations. By examining several different countries, students gain an understanding of the great diversity of political life and the many ways in which politics affects citizens."
POLI 204 "Introduction to Canadian Politics" "This course is a basic introduction to the fundamental issues of Canadian public life and the federal political system. It presents an overview of the constitution, institutions, political parties, electoral system, interest groups, and public opinion that represent the essential components of Canadas political culture and government."
POLI 205 "Introduction to International Relations" "This course introduces the principal theories, concepts, and debates in the contemporary study of international relations. It provides an overview of issues in international security, international political economy and global governance."
POLI 206 "Introduction to Western Political Theory" "This course introduces students to the study of Western political theory through a variety of primary source readings. Assigned texts may be drawn from philosophy, history, literature and other forms of political writing."
POLI 207 "Introduction to Political Science Research " "This course demonstrates how research is conducted in political science. Students learn how to develop a research design. The course introduces them to various research methodologies and provides several approaches for reporting and presenting research."
POLI 208 "(also listed as LOYC 240)" ""
POLI 209 "Public Security and Terrorism" "This course provides an overview of modern terrorism and its evolution, focusing on terrorist movements, groups, and incidents in many parts of the world over time. Students gain an understanding of the theory behind terrorism, its roots, goals, and ideologies, as well as its relation to governments, the media, and the public."
POLI 214 "Human Rights: An Overview" "This course introduces students to the historical origins of the concept of human rights; the international regime and the acceptance of several generations of rights such as civil and political rights, economic rights, group rights, and womens rights; the critiques of universalism and the problems of implementation of human rights."
POLI 215 "Global Politics" "This course introduces students to several theoretical perspectives related to global politics, and then examines current events. The focus is on conflict resolution, the impact of globalization, the roles of international organizations, and information technology."
POLI 216 "Introduction to the United Nations " "This course examines the operations and issues of the United Nations organization. It covers the operation of the Security Council and other components of the United Nations. It surveys micro-issues such as routine operations, the internal bureaucracy, the ethics of its procedures, and its historical background."
POLI 217 "Comparing Democracies " "This course introduces students to the field of comparative politics by examining the institutional structures of established, advanced industrial democracies. Particular emphasis is placed on the study of constitutions; the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government; and electoral and party systems."
POLI 219 "Governance and Organized Crime " "This course describes and defines organized crime, providing an overview of its history, different theories and models explaining it and the legal processes related to it. The course examines the role played by government agencies, such as the police and the bureaucracy, and the international bodies that combat it. Issues addressed in this course may include drug trafficking, racketeering, human trafficking, extortion, and economic crimes. A number of actual organized crime groups are analyzed."
POLI 285 "(also listed as ANTH 285/HIST 285/SOCI 285)" ""
POLI 298 "Selected Topics in Political Science" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
POLI 301 "Social Movements and Protest Politics" "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or 205; or permission of the Department. This course examines the ideas, organization, and actions of such social movements as environmentalism, peace, human rights, labour, feminism, and antiglobalization. Theories of social movement mobilization, influence across national contexts, and the politics of protest are given particular attention."
POLI 302 "Causes of War" "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course examines the causes of war and peace in the international system. It studies the impact on war and peace of such influences as cognitive psychology, identity, group decision-making, bureaucratic processes, regime types, conflict spirals, arms control, arms races, balance of power, hegemonic stability theory, trade interdependence, environment and non-renewable resources, and international institutions."
POLI 303 "Chinese Security Politics " "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course examines the rise of China as a major power, and in particular the implications this has for military aspects of Chinas relations. Chinas security policy is examined from a theoretical, historical, political, and economic perspective, and the implications of these are examined in the cases of its foreign relations with neighbours and other great powers."
POLI 304 "Theories of Foreign Policy Making " "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course explores the major international and domestic determinants of foreign policy. Principal topics include the influence on foreign policy of the international system, geography, leadership, regime-type, transnationalism, and non-governmental organizations. This course draws upon the experiences of a variety of Western democratic states."
POLI 305 "International Political Economy" "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course examines institutions, processes, and issues in economic relations between states. Topics covered include theories of international political economy (IPE), international trade, global finance, multinational corporations, economic development, globalization, and regional blocs."
POLI 306 "Classical Political Thought " "Prerequisite: POLI 206 or permission of the Department. This course focuses on the foundations of Western political thinking in ancient Greece. Through a careful examination of texts by Greek poets, historians and philosophers, concepts such as nature and convention, regime types, and justice and the good life are explored."
POLI 307 "The U.S. Presidency " "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course provides a broad yet detailed introduction to the U.S. Presidency. Primary topics of study include the constitutional nature of the presidential office, how it has evolved over time, its place in American politics, its relationship with the rest of the federal government, its role in the policy-making process, and the relationship between individual presidents and the presidency as an institution."
POLI 308 "Politics of Emerging Economies " "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course examines the political and economic development of emerging countries. It addresses questions of autonomy/dependence on external powers, economic models, systems of government, and state-society relations, looking at historical and contemporary processes."
POLI 309 "Women and Politics in Canada" "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. This course examines the role of women in Canadian politics at the federal, provincial, and local level. Historical, theoretical, and legal perspectives are examined and include the politics of racism; sexuality; community organizing; suffrage; and representation within formal political structures. It focuses on the diversity and development of the womens movement in Canada."
POLI 310 "Politics of the U.S." "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course surveys the structures and dynamics that inform the contemporary American political process. In addition to studying the traditional governmental institutions, the course aims to provide a foundation for understanding and critically analyzing public opinion, the media and elections, federalism, political parties and interest groups, civil rights and civil liberties, and current issues in public policy."
POLI 311 "International Public Law" "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course explores the meaning, effectiveness, and potential of interstate law. Among the topics covered are the source and development of international law; the role of the International Court of Justice; sovereignty, territory, and natural resources; human rights violations, the state and war crimes tribunals; and international environmental law."
POLI 312 "Special Topics in International Politics " "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
POLI 313 "Special Topics in Comparative Politics" "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
POLI 314 "Special Topics in Canadian and Quebec Politics" "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
POLI 315 "International Organizations" "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course offers an overview of international institutions and global governance. It examines major theoretical perspectives on international organizations, and addresses the role of the United Nations system, regional organizations, and non-governmental organizations in promoting international co-operation to address collective problems."
POLI 316 "Special Topics in Public Policy and Administration" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
POLI 317 "Special Topics in Political Theory " "Prerequisite: POLI 206 or permission of the Department. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
POLI 318 "Introduction to Strategic Studies " "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course is an introductory examination of the theoretical aspects of strategic studies, including the principles of war, as they apply to combat on land, at sea, and in the air."
POLI 319 "European Politics and Government" "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course is a study of government and politics in selected European countries. It provides an analysis of political institutions, cultures, and processes."
POLI 320 "Development of Western Legal Systems" "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course is an overview of the major legal systems of the Western world, with special emphasis on the political decisions which influenced their growth and direction. Students study the development of Roman law, Romano-Germanic law, and English common law."
POLI 321 "Canadian and Quebec Law" "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. This course is an introduction to Canadian and Quebec law. Certain areas of criminal law, the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and Quebec civil law are emphasized. An analysis is undertaken of criminal court structure and procedure, legal constitutional rights, and civil court structure and procedure."
POLI 322 "Israeli Political System" "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course introduces students to the study of the emergence and the operation of the Israeli political system and government. Topics may include the formation of the Israeli State; the legislative, the executive, political parties and the electoral process; ethnic divisions; gender and politics; and the issue of the Palestinian territories."
POLI 323 "Politics of Eastern Europe" "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course studies the political process and institutions of the region, with a special focus on the recent transformation relating to economic problems, social structures, culture, and ethnic conflicts, as well as the role of governmental policies in domestic and foreign affairs."
POLI 324 "Parliament and the Charter " "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. This course examines the judicial and parliamentary responses to the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Particular attention is paid to the judicialization of politics and the emerging dialogue on rights between courts and legislatures in important areas of public policy."
POLI 327 "Comparative Democratization " "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course discusses the nature of democracy and the challenges of democratization, drawing on experiences with democratization in Southern Europe, Latin America, Eastern Europe, and Africa. Students assess prospects for democratization and consider how other countries might encourage greater democracy in countries currently experiencing regime change."
POLI 328 "Public Policy and the Politics of Equality" "This course reviews theoretical debates about the role of the state and the individual, collective and individual rights, integration, and the role of cultural diversity and identity. It examines selected policy demands of women, the poor, refugees, and other constituencies."
POLI 329 "American Foreign Policy" "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course covers the sources and significance of American foreign policy, including the U.S. foreign policy-making process, the political and historical context of U.S. foreign policy decision making, and the nature and dimensions of contemporary American power. Major theoretical and policy debates are considered."
POLI 330 "Principles of Public Administration" "This course examines the theory and practice of public administration in Canada. The nature of accountability in public sector environments is reviewed in order to study how policy is developed, implemented, and evaluated by bureaucracies, central agencies, and the legislative branches of government."
POLI 331 "Comparative Party Systems " "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course introduces students to the academic study of political parties and party systems. It examines the determinants of party behaviour from a number of theoretical perspectives, including historical, sociological and institutional. The topics covered include, but are not limited to, the number of parties, electoral systems, party finance, leadership selection, and government formation and stability. Specific case studies are selected both from established and new democracies."
POLI 332 "Theories of International Relations" "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course provides an introduction to international relations theory, covering the major debates between realism, liberalism, constructivism, and critical theory, as well as competing epistemological and methodological orientations."
POLI 334 "Political Participation in Canada " "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. This course examines the various approaches to understanding the participation of the public in politics, primarily electoral but also non-electoral activities, in Canada and from a comparative perspective."
POLI 335 "Politics of the Peoples Republic of China" "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course focuses on the political development of the Peoples Republic of China. Topics include political mobilization, economic development, nationalism, and the policy process."
POLI 339 "(also listed as SCPA 339)" ""
POLI 340 "Canadian Political Culture " "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. This course approaches Canadian politics from a societal perspective. The objective is to develop a better understanding of Canadas political culture through a cross-time and cross-national analysis."
POLI 341 "Provincial and Territorial Politics " "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. This course analyzes regional political cultures in Canada including the development of provincial political parties and public administrations, the rise of third parties, provincial and territorial constitutional positions, electoral behaviour, and institutional reform in the northern Territories."
POLI 345 "Contemporary Political Philosophy" "Prerequisite: POLI 206 or permission of the Department. This course examines the character of contemporary political theory when viewed from both a modernist and an anti-modernist understanding of political life. The course also involves an examination into what it means to be modern and whether the critique of modernity is itself a very modern activity."
POLI 349 "Political and Social Theory and the City" "Prerequisite: POLI 206 or permission of the Department. This course examines the theoretical and ideological aspects of city government in historical and normative perspective."
POLI 351 "Canadian Federalism" "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. This course is a critical and analytical study of the theory of federalism, its principles, and techniques, and the response of Canadian federal systems to the demands of cultural dualism and regional pressures."
POLI 352 "Comparative Urban Politics and Government" "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or 204; or permission of the Department. This course deals with politics and government in selected Canadian cities, with comparative reference to cities elsewhere in the world."
POLI 353 "Principles of Public Policy " "This course examines the concepts, theories and approaches to the study of public policy. It also explores the major actors, processes and institutions involved in the development of public policy from a Canadian and/or comparative perspective. Topics include the role of the bureaucracy, globalization and internationalization, and state-society relations in policy-making."
POLI 356 "Canadian Political Parties" "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. This course provides a comprehensive examination of the origins and development of political parties in Canada at both the federal and provincial levels. Theories about party development, including one party dominance, brokerage politics and third party development, are examined in order to determine the efficacy of political parties."
POLI 361 "Advocacy Groups and Public Policy" "Students examine the broad social, economic, political, and cultural forces shaping governmental decisions and policies. Particular attention is paid to the conflict between private and public concerns."
POLI 363 "Issues in Canadian Public Policy" "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. The course examines alternative public policies in selected areas at the federal, provincial, and municipal levels in Canada. Policies analyzed vary from year to year and include such areas as social welfare, culture, education, language, environmental protection, energy conservation, urban renewal, and economic policy."
POLI 364 "Hellenistic, Roman, Medieval Political Philosophy" "Prerequisite: POLI 206 or permission of the Department. This course examines the political teachings of the Hellenistic schools such as the Academics, the Stoics, the Epicureans and the Skeptics, the political writings from the Roman Republic and Empire, and the political problematics posed by early Christianity."
POLI 365 "Canadian Public Administration" "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. This course examines the organization and composition of the federal bureaucracy, the role of the bureaucracy in the making and implementation of public policy, patterns of recruitment, and the mechanisms of accountability and control."
POLI 366 "Politics of Africa" "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course studies political institutions and processes in Africa from a comparative perspective. Countries and topics selected may vary from year to year."
POLI 367 "Quebec Public Administration" "Prerequisite: POLI 204 or permission of the Department. This course examines the organization and composition of Quebec bureaucracy, the role of civil servants and the making and implementation of public policy, patterns of recruitment, and the mechanisms of accountability and control."
POLI 368 "Media, Technology and Politics" "Prerequisite: POLI 206 or permission of the Department. This course examines the impact upon politics of changes in technology and the media. Students discuss a diverse range of contemporary thinkers and their understanding of the digital future. Particular attention is paid to the age of electronic politics and its effect upon the actual practice of political power."
POLI 371 "Early Modern Political Philosophy" "Prerequisite: POLI 206 or permission of the Department. Students are introduced to the origins of modern political thought from the Renaissance and the Reformation through to the mid-18th century."
POLI 373 "Late Modern Political Philosophy" "Prerequisite: POLI 206 or permission of the Department. This course examines the progression and criticism of modern political thought from the mid-18th century through to the early-20th century."
POLI 376 "Politics of Northern Ireland" "This course focuses on the political evolution of Northern Ireland over three distinct periods: the Stormont Parliament (1921-1972); direct rule by Westminster (1972-1998); and devolved government after the 1998 Good Friday Agreement. Topics may include constitutional politics and partition, religion and politics, political parties, sectarianism, the Troubles, the Good Friday Agreement, and the post-1998 power-sharing institutions."
POLI 379 "Politics of Latin America" "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course explores Latin American politics, economics, society, and culture from a multidimensional perspective. It emphasizes the common elements and diverging factors that characterize the contemporary evolution of Latin American countries."
POLI 384 "Principles of Political Theory" "Prerequisite: POLI 206 or permission of the Department. This course is an intensive study of a basic work by a major thinker such as Plato, Aristotle, Machiavelli, Hobbes or Hegel. It examines a major text such as Platos "
POLI 386 "Contemporary Liberalism and Its Critics" "Prerequisite: POLI 206 or permission of the Department. This course examines recent developments in the theory and practice of liberalism, as well as criticisms of liberal principles and the liberal way of life from a range of contemporary perspectives."
POLI 388 "Human Rights and International Justice" "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course surveys normative questions comprising human rights discourse, with an emphasis on international efforts to promote human rights standards. Topics include the role of the United Nations, the North-South debate, environmental security, the obligation of individuals and states, womens rights and the work of non-governmental organizations. Special consideration is given to the controversy between the universal and particular applications of human rights."
POLI 389 "(also listed as THEO 343)" ""
POLI 390 "Critical Perspectives on Modern Political Science" "This course raises theoretical and practical questions regarding the limits, purposes, and presuppositions of modern political science through an examination of criticisms of and alternatives to prevailing modes of inquiry."
POLI 391 "Middle East and Global Conflict" "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course is a study of the Middle East in transition, conflict and ideology in a global context of changing regional alliances. Topics include regional conflicts such as the Arab-Israeli conflict, the Iraq-Iran war, the Gulf crisis, foreign policy process, and the end of the cold war and its impact in the new millennium."
POLI 392 "Approaches to Social Science Inquiry" "This course introduces students to a variety of approaches to social scientific inquiry, focusing on their underlying logics. The course covers variable-based research of the qualitative and quantitative variety and alternatives to this approach such as critical theory, process-tracing, modelling, ethnography, interpretivist analysis, and conceptual analysis."
POLI 393 "Quantitative Research Methods" "In this course, students learn how to define, operationalize, and measure variables and how to statistically describe the relationship between variables with the help of statistical software."
POLI 394 "Globalization and Sustainable Development" "Prerequisite: POLI 205 or permission of the Department. This course is an introduction to the emerging field of global environmental politics. It surveys the present environmental crisis and the roles of states, international organizations, and civil society. Various case studies dealing with oceans, forests, fisheries, biodiversity, global warming, and others are used to illustrate the inherent complexity of transnational ecological issues in the era of globalization."
POLI 395 "Politics of the Middle East" "Prerequisite: POLI 203 or permission of the Department. This course is a comparative study of politics and society in the modern Middle East and North Africa. Topics include the end of empires and the emergence of nation-states after World War I, political economy, regional conflicts, the question of democracy, the rise of religious movements, and the dynamics of revolutions and regime change."
POLI 396 "Honours Tutorial" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Honours (Thesis Option B) in Political Science. This course requires students to conduct a literature review in a topic to be chosen for their thesis, complete a bibliography, and work on their methodological approaches."
POLI 400 "Advanced Seminar in International Relations Theory " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 205; or permission of the Department. This course addresses central questions of international relations theory, such as the causes of war, the paths to peace and co-operation, and the relationship between power and wealth. Students consider major paradigmatic approaches to these questions from realist, liberal and constructivist perspectives, as well as the utility of eclectic or cross-paradigmatic approaches."
POLI 401 "American Political Thought " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 206; or permission of the Department. This seminar examines texts articulating the theoretical foundations and historical development of the American regime, with attention to the relationship between the institutions, processes, individuals and ideas shaping the American way of life."
POLI 402 "Advanced International Political Economy " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 205; or permission of the Department. This course covers both the major theoretical approaches in International Political Economy (IPE) and the practical efforts of states to shape, control, and adapt to the international economic system. Students develop and continually practise the skills of logically coherent analysis, discussion, and presentation."
POLI 403 "Global Ecopolitical Analysis " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 205; or permission of the Department. This seminar course contextualizes contemporary ecological problems and global governance efforts to mitigate them. Students analyze multilateral environmental agreements in depth and explore various policy options that promise to anticipate future international ecopolitical issues."
POLI 404 "International Institutions " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 205; or permission of the Department. This course is an advanced seminar covering major theoretical perspectives on the significance in world politics of international institutions and regimes, and of inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations."
POLI 405 "Comparative Electoral Systems " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This course focuses on the various political and policy impacts that electoral laws have on party competition in both advanced industrialized and less developed democracies. The course introduces students to the detailed study of both the structure and the consequences of the main electoral systems."
POLI 406 "Comparative Federalism and Political Integration " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This course begins by examining the theories of political integration, federalism and nationalism, and the various policy instruments available to the modern state to achieve integration, before moving to an analysis of the current situation in a range of modern federal states as well as the emerging confederal system of the European Union."
POLI 407 "Parliamentary Bills of Rights " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 204; or permission of the Department. This seminar explores the political origins and functioning of bills of rights in selected parliamentary democracies. Particular attention is paid to the judicialization of politics and the attempts to promote institutional dialogue between judicial and parliamentary actors in Westminister systems such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom."
POLI 408 "Public Opinion and Public Policy " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 204; or permission of the Department. By relying on examples from Quebec and Canada, this seminar focuses on the role of public opinion in shaping public policy. It offers an overview of scholarly debate and research on public opinion and political communication."
POLI 409 "Canada: State-Society Relations " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 204; or permission of the Department. The current research associated with the perception of a growing sense of democratic malaise and political discontent has prompted several academics to assess the current state of Canadian democracy. Students examine and discuss the current research and critically analyze the implications for Canadas state-society relations."
POLI 410 "Environmental Policy in the Developing World " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203 or GEOG 300; or permission of the Department. This course surveys the interactions between development strategies and the environment. Topics may include the environmental ramifications of large development projects, different systems of property rights, decentralization, international debt, foreign aid, and the challenges associated with managing highly valuable natural resources."
POLI 411 "Gender and Public Policy " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203 or 204; or permission of the Department. This course fosters an understanding of the theoretical and practical issues surrounding the study of gender and public policy and introduces them to recent scholarship in this area. Students examine a number of themes and debates, including gender and policy studies, gender and the welfare state, womens groups in the policy process, and feminist perspectives on the bureaucracy."
POLI 412 "Comparative Social Policy " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This seminar examines various explanations for the development and retrenchment of the welfare state in different countries. It analyzes typologies developed to conceptualize welfare-state regimes and examines, in a comparative fashion, key social policies such as health, pensions, and employment."
POLI 414 "Authors of Political Imagination " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 206; or permission of the Department. This seminar considers the political impact of contingent narrative approaches to shifts in an individuals political imagination as opposed to purely rational or universally applicable philosophical arguments. The political potential of a broad range of literary styles, such as poetry, drama and the short story, is discussed alongside texts from the fields of philosophy, neuroscience and rhetoric so that their respective impacts can be assessed."
POLI 415 "Modern Political Theory and Religion " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 206; or permission of the Department. This seminar explores the use and abuse of religious ideas, texts and traditions in the theoretical foundations of modernity such as ethical priorities and orientations, political and social institutions, and the purposes and status of science, found at the core of modern life."
POLI 416 "Ancient Political Texts " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 206; or permission of the Department.This seminar explores, by careful reading of philosophic, poetic, or historical texts, the ancient political conceptualizations that frame and contribute to Western political ideas, issues and goals."
POLI 417 "Governance" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 206; or permission of the Department. This seminar investigates how the efforts of governments to control the lives, thoughts and thought processes of the members of society are central to the modern governmental process and how they have been part of the agenda since the beginning of the late modern era."
POLI 418 "Machiavelli " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 206; or permission of the Department. This seminar acquaints students with the arguments surrounding Machiavellian scholarship in particular and Renaissance political issues in general. Students study two of Machiavellis canonical texts ("
POLI 419 "Strategic Studies" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 205; or permission of the Department. This seminar covers the theory and application of nuclear weapons as a means of deterrence to warfare. It surveys issues in nuclear control, missile defense, and deterrence design. Through simulations, special attention is given to contrasting theories on the utility of nuclear force."
POLI 420 "Politics of Conservation" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 205; or permission of the Department. This course challenges students to analyze the complexities of wildlife conservation strategies at the local, national, and international levels. Students engage in teamwork and write individual papers on both specific endangered species and related concepts such as trade, development, corruption, conflict, public relations, and adaptive governance."
POLI 421 "Transnational Politics" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 205; or permission of the Department. This seminar examines the activities of non-state actors, including NGOs, social movements, corporations, and individuals, and their roles in creating global society, building international institutions, and shaping foreign policy. Emphasis is placed on theories which seek to explain the relative influence of these actors in the international political system."
POLI 422 "Canadian Foreign Policy" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 205; or permission of the Department. This course examines Canadas foreign policy. In this seminar, particular emphasis is given to the decision-making process by which foreign policy is formulated and implemented, with particular reference to Canadian relations vis--vis the United States, the Commonwealth, and the developing countries."
POLI 423 "Peace Studies and Global Governance" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 205; or permission of the Department. This seminar focuses on the theory and practice of peace amongst nations. The course begins with a survey of analyses explaining the causes of aggression, war and peace, including theories of structural violence and revolution; nationalism and cosmopolitanism. It then examines the roles played by the state, international organizations, and peace movements, focusing on global and regional disarmament initiatives and peace-keeping."
POLI 424 "Corruption" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This seminar deals with the corruption, patronage, and clientelism that characterize politics in much of the world. Case studies are used to explore the structures and processes leading to the use of informal channels and personal connections for doing politics."
POLI 425 "Foundations of Liberalism " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 206; or permission of the Department. This seminar examines the genesis, principles and purposes of classical liberalism as it is articulated by early modern authors. This involves investigating conceptions of and arguments for personal freedom, natural equality, private property, individual rights and limited government, among other topics. It then explores the subsequent development and distortion of liberal ideas by later theorists in the tradition."
POLI 426 "Nietzsche " "Prerequisite: N.B. number (3) and POLI 206; or permission of the Department. This seminar is devoted to an exploration of the philosophical teaching of Friedrich Nietzsche and the subsequent influence of this teaching on the political and spiritual developments of Western culture. Nietzsches influence on such movements as deconstruction, nihilism, and postmodernism is explored."
POLI 427 "Political Thought of the Enlightenment " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 206; or permission of the Department. This course examines the impact of Enlighten-ment thinking in Europe, especially Scotland and the reformed parts of Northern France, Switzerland, the Netherlands, and the German states."
POLI 428 "Constitutional Politics in Canada " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 204; or permission of the Department. This seminar considers the emergence of mega constitutional politics in the 1960-1995 period involving state and societal actors. Topics include the Victoria Charter, Patriation, Meech Lake Accord, Charlottetown Accord, the 1980 and 1995 Quebec referenda, and attempts at non-constitutional reform since 1995."
POLI 429 "Political Socialization in Canadian and Comparative Perspective" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203 or 204; or permission of the Department. This course aims at understanding the social origins of political opinions, attitudes and values, under what conditions they change, and how they affect political dynamics in Canada and in a comparative perspective."
POLI 431 "State-Society Relations in China " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This course explores different approaches to the study of state-society relations in the Peoples Republic of China. Specifically, the course considers the applicability of concepts such as neo-traditionalism, state reach, corporatism, civil society, and rightful resistance during both the Maoist and reform eras."
POLI 433 "Critics of Modernity" "Prerequisite: See N.B.number (3) and POLI 206; or permission of the Department. This seminar studies selected writings by major critics of modernity during the 20th century. The authors studied may include Hannah Arendt, Albert Camus, Fyodor Dostoevsky, George Grant, Bertrand de Jouvenel, Alasdair MacIntyre, Jacques Maritain, Richard Niebuhr, Michael Oakeshott, Leo Strauss, Charles Taylor, and Eric Voegelin."
POLI 434 "Politics of Violence in Latin America" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This course provides an overview of Latin American history and development, beginning with conquest, through the lens of violence. Latin America is one of the most violent regions of the world. Gang wars, drug trafficking, kidnappings, and femicides are the regular fodder of the news media, but the class focuses on the structural violence  the marginalization and oppression of the poor masses inherent to local societies  that underlies the more spectacular forms of violence."
POLI 435 "Advanced Seminar in U.S. Politics" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This course examines specific substantive or thematic topics in U.S. government and politics, such as the U.S. Congress and the legislative process, U.S. constitutional law, U.S. law and society, and American political development."
POLI 436 "State and Society in the Middle East" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This seminar explores patterns of authority and protest in the Middle East. The topics include the institutional and ideological sources of authoritarianism, the role of the military in politics, the tension between religion and secularism in the formation of national identities, and the various social movements, including religious and ethnic movements, that challenge prevailing structures of power."
POLI 437 "Special Issues in African Development" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This course surveys debates concerning development with a special focus on sub-Saharan Africa. Topics include the role of the state in development, the effect of African economies global connections, the activities of non-governmental organizations, and the effect of natural resources on development."
POLI 438 "Decentralization and Development" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This course introduces concepts related to the various forms of decentralization and explores the diverse expectations, politics, and outcomes associated with decentralization."
POLI 463 "Government and Business in Canada" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 204; or permission of the Department. This seminar in public policy is designed to explore the relationship between government and business in Canada. Particular attention is paid to the formation and implementation of policy intended to promote and control enterprise, and the role of government as entrepreneur."
POLI 481 "Advanced Seminar in European Politics" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This seminar examines the nature of politics of the states and societies of Western Europe, including the significance of their membership in the European Union."
POLI 483 "State and Society in Latin America" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This seminar examines the nature of politics in Latin America. A specific focus is placed on selective issues of state-society relations, and the emergence of new political forces and institutions in response to changes in the socio-economic structure of the region."
POLI 484 "Post-Communist Democracies" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This seminar reviews the post-communist states transition to democracy and their state-formation. The seminar focuses on the interplay between the forces of nationalism, ethnicity, identity, and the transition to democratic structures."
POLI 485 "Issues in Development and Democracy" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department. This seminar focuses on the political and economic problems of the new nations. A particular emphasis is placed on understanding the process of development and state formation within a democratic context."
POLI 486 "Advanced Seminar in International Relations" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 205; or permission of the Department."
POLI 487 "Advanced Seminar in Comparative Politics" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203; or permission of the Department."
POLI 488 "Advanced Seminar in Canadian and Quebec Politics" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 204; or permission of the Department."
POLI 489 "Advanced Seminar in Public Policy and Administration" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 203 or 204; or permission of the Department."
POLI 490 "Advanced Seminar in Political Theory" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and POLI 206; or permission of the Department."
POLI 491 "Directed Studies in Political Science" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (3) and permission of the undergraduate program director. This special reading course is designed in conjunction with a faculty member to explore topics and themes in a specific research area of interest to the student and faculty member."
POLI 495 "Honours Thesis" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Honours (Thesis Option B) in Political Science. The student works with an individual faculty member in a particular field of study in Political Science. Students are asked to produce a sustained piece of written work to be defended before a departmental committee."
POLI 496 "Honours Seminar" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This seminar involves the student in formulating an honours research proposal, and the research and writing of an honours paper. Topics of the seminar vary from year to year."
POLI 497 "Internship" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. The internship is a one-term apprenticeship in some aspect of public affairs and policy analysis. Placements may be drawn from all areas of possible employment, including private sector, government and community organizations. Students are required to submit a written report which summarizes and evaluates their work experience."
PSYC 200 "Introductory Psychology" "This comprehensive survey course introduces the student to a wide variety of topics in scientific psychology. Topics include the foundations of modern psychology, neural mechanisms, learning and memory, sensation and perception, motivation and emotion, cognitive processes, social influences, personality, disorders of cognition and behaviour, and therapy."
PSYC 210 "Critical Thinking in Psychology" "This course provides an innovative approach to understanding how psychologists think about the mind and behaviour, ask and answer questions, and collect and interpret evidence to clarify ideas and test hypotheses. Students learn the difference between critical thinking and gullibility. Students also develop skills to identify errors and misrepresentations in information presented in the media and in viewpoints driven by agendas rather than evidence."
PSYC 221 "Foundations of Personality " "The organization, functioning, and development of personality are discussed from the point of view of the major current theories. Evidence from empirical studies is introduced to illustrate various influences on personality. Socio-economic, cultural, and biological factors may also be considered."
PSYC 222 "Person and Society " "This course considers current personality and social psychology research as it relates to peoples everyday lives. The focus is on blending these two research areas. The study of personality concerns itself with the psychology of the individual, individual differences, and the role of individual-level factors in explaining behaviour. In contrast, social psychology focuses on how behaviour may be influenced by social and contextual factors. Topics may include the many ways of describing the self and others, persuasion, group processes, close relationships, aggression, and prosocial behaviour."
PSYC 223 "Motivation and Emotion in Daily Life " "Why do individuals do the things they do? Why dont individuals do the things they dont do? When confronted with challenges, what determines whether individuals persist in the face of difficulty or decide to invest their energy elsewhere? This course presents models that address the question of why individuals do the things they do. These models are related to specific topics such as appetitive behaviour, love and sexual behaviour, arousal and attention, peak performance, aggression and anger, conflict, stress, curiosity, creativity, goal-setting, and achievement."
PSYC 230 "Womb to Tomb: Psychological Transitions Across the Lifespan " "This course studies the cognitive, socio-emotional, and physical changes and continuities that occur across the lifespan. Major theories of development are discussed and related to each of the life stages. Students also gain insight into the developmental processes that influence themselves and others."
PSYC 233 "Adolescence" "This course is an introduction to the study of adolescence. Topics are considered from cross-disciplinary and cross-cultural perspectives. Topics may include physical change, family relationships, friends and peers, sexual and sex-related behaviours, cognitive growth, and lifestyles."
PSYC 235 "When Good Kids Go Bad " "This course examines the social, emotional, and behavioural problems encountered by children, youth, and parents. Manifestations of these issues range from day-to-day normal concerns to maladaptive and dangerous behaviours. Potential contributing biological, familial, peer, cultural, and economic factors are considered, as well as the uniquely different ways in which individuals react to what seem to be similar backgrounds."
PSYC 240 "Foundations of Psychopathology " "This course deals with major concepts and issues concerning psychopathology in humans. It considers current scientific models of diagnosis, etiology, assessment, and therapy. It reviews the major disorders of the DSM system, and explores social, learning, cognitive, biomedical, and psychodynamic approaches to major clinical disorders."
PSYC 241 "Stress, Health, and Coping " "Coping skills are directly related to health and to the amount of stress a person experiences. This course introduces students to research that explains how and why stress affects health. The ways in which coping skills and other recourses can effectively reduce stress are also considered. The course examines what psychologists know about stress in a research-oriented manner, giving equal attention to the physiological, psychological, and cognitive underpinnings of coping and health."
PSYC 242 "Psychology and the Law " "Psychology and the law interact in myriad ways. The criminal justice system, from its code to its enforcement, is based on implicit psychological assumptions about human behaviour and how it should be controlled. Those in the justice system make decisions based on evidence from observations and testimony, both of which are assumed to be gathered in an objective, unbiased manner. Those in psychological professions assume they can influence decisions made in the legal system by providing experimental evidence. This course examines the roles psychologists play in the legal system, the assumptions of both legal and psychological professional groups, and how these groups can complement one another."
PSYC 243 "Learning Disabilities" "This course deals with selected aspects of theory and practice related to learning disabilities including perceptual and motor disabilities, language disabilities, and methods of diagnosis and remediation. Issues of accurate assessment and differentiation from other forms of disability are also considered."
PSYC 250 "Drugs and Behaviour " "This course examines various factors related to the use and abuse of licit and illicit drugs including alcohol and nicotine, depressants and stimulants, tranquilizers, opium derivatives, and hallucinogenic compounds. One of the main themes emphasized is why some people lose their ability to socially and physiologically regulate their intake. The course material focuses on the prevalent concepts in the field, theoretical models guiding researchers and clinicians, and approaches to intervention."
PSYC 251 "Learning and Memory in Daily Life " "This course examines current research on learning and memory and introduces students to a variety of topics in this area. Theories of learning and memory are related to examples from everyday life. Specific topics may include memory accuracy, techniques for improving study skills and school performance, animal training, sports training, strategies for memory improvement, strategies for changing bad habits, and child discipline."
PSYC 255 "Brain and Behaviour " "This course is an introduction to the biological bases of behaviour. The structural and functional anatomy of the central nervous system is presented, with particular emphasis on the neural pathways involved in behaviours relating to motivation, mood, learning and memory, and sensation and perception. This course explores how recent research helps in understanding how normal and abnormal brain functioning affect human behaviour."
PSYC 264 "Perception and Cognition in Daily Life" "This course introduces topics related to perception and cognition. The emphasis of the course is on how humans acquire, store, and use information in real-world contexts. Topics covered include reading, object perception, art and motion pictures, language processing, music, problem solving, and planning."
PSYC 297 "Selected Topics in Psychology" ""
PSYC 298 "Selected Topics in Psychology" ""
PSYC 299 "Selected Topics in Psychology" ""
PSYC 305 "History and Systems" "Prerequisite: PSYC 200 or equivalent. This introductory course examines the historical background of psychology beginning with ancient Greece, the Middle Ages, and the Renaissance, through the William James era. Early contributions to psychology from the fields of philosophy, religion, physics, physiology, and psychophysics are presented and related to the various psychological schools of thought of the 19th century. Students gain an understanding of how cultural and social forces and various scientific paradigms shaped psychological theory and how psychological perspectives contribute to social life."
PSYC 310 "Research Methods and Designs I" "Prerequisite: PSYC 200 or equivalent; PSYC 315 previously or concurrently. This course describes the methods used by psychology researchers to obtain information and understand psychological phenomena and processes. Students learn how research studies are conceptualized and conducted, and how data are analyzed and interpreted within specific areas of psychology. Observational, experimental, and correlational techniques are presented in the context of ongoing research, to enable students to develop a conceptual understanding of the procedures used to develop and evaluate hypotheses and theories in psychology."
PSYC 311 "Research Methods and Designs II" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; PSYC 316 previously or concurrently; and permission of the Department. Advanced methodological issues in psychological research are introduced. Students gain experience in the critical evaluation of research design and methodology by conducting several experiments in different research areas, by analyzing and interpreting data from these experiments, and writing and presenting their research findings. This course is primarily intended for students who are preparing for graduate school. Lectures and laboratory."
PSYC 315 "Statistical Analysis I" "Prerequisite: PSYC 200 or equivalent; or permission of the Department. This course is an introduction to statistics that are used in the context of psychology research. Topics dealt with include frequency distributions, measures of central tendency and dispersion, the normal curve, correlation, linear regression, elementary probability theory, an introduction to hypothesis testing, and the t test. These topics are covered in lectures and in weekly laboratory sessions where students learn how to perform statistical tests both manually and with specialized software."
PSYC 316 "Statistical Analysis II" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315. This course is an extension of PSYC 315. It is designed to advance students understanding of hypothesis testing and statistical inferences. The course presents the general linear model, which subsumes multiple regression, analysis of variance (ANOVA), and analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). As well, the course deals in detail with the limits of null-hypothesis significance testing (NHST) and reviews alternatives to NHST including confidence intervals, measures of effect size, and meta-analysis. Lectures and weekly laboratory."
PSYC 321 "Fundamentals of Personality" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, previously or concurrently. This course is an introduction to theories of personality. The development, structure, and correlates of personality are presented from the viewpoint of major classical and current theories. Theories may include trait, biological, learning, and cognitive perspectives, as well as psychodynamic, humanistic, and existential perspectives. Through the examination of specific studies and the discussion of general methodological principles of personality research, emphasis is placed on the role of research in shaping and validating theories of personality."
PSYC 325 "Fundamentals of Social Psychology " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, previously or concurrently. This course is an introduction to social psychology. It covers the scientific study of how peoples thoughts, feelings, and behaviours are influenced by the presence of others. Topics discussed may include social and self perception; attitudes and attitude change; and conformity, group processes, interpersonal attraction, prosocial behaviour, aggression, and prejudice."
PSYC 333 "Fundamentals of Lifespan Development" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, previously or concurrently. This course is an introduction to developmental psychology. It provides a broad survey of psychological research and theories about human development across the lifespan. It emphasizes the interaction of physical, cognitive, and socio-emotional domains in development from infancy to old age. Although the main focus of the course is on normative development, aspects of abnormal development may be covered. Specific methodological challenges and procedures relevant to developmental research are also discussed."
PSYC 340 "Fundamentals of Psychopathology " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, previously or concurrently. This course is an introduction to psychopathology. The course deals with major concepts and issues in the study of psychopathology. It focuses on the major models of etiology, diagnosis, prognosis, assessment, and treatment, and presents the major disorders and five axes of the DSM system. Behavioural, cognitive, social learning, neurobiological, sociocultural, evolutionary, and psychodynamic approaches to psychopathology are covered, with an emphasis on research and methodology throughout."
PSYC 341 "Fundamentals of Health Psychology" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, previously or concurrently. This course is an introduction to the multidisciplinary field of health psychology. Issues relating to health and illness across the lifespan, including health promotion and maintenance, prevention and treatment of illness, etiology and correlates of health, illness and dysfunction, and the health care system are covered from a biopsychosocial perspective. Topics such as social support, smoking, stress, cardiovascular disease, pain, and cancer are also presented."
PSYC 342 "Forensic Psychology " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 340. This course critically examines research and theory relating to a number of selected issues of contemporary interest in forensic psychology. Topics such as the admissibility of scientific evidence, eye-witness testimony, trauma and memory, jury selection, clinical and actuarial profiling, psychopathy, serial offenders, the validity of psychiatric examinations and lie detectors, the insanity defence, and expert testimony are presented in light of recent Canadian and American legal decisions."
PSYC 351 "Fundamentals of Learning " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, previously or concurrently. This course is an introduction to theories and empirical findings concerning basic mechanisms of learning and memory in humans and non-human animals. Topics covered may include the study of learning in historical perspective, Pavlovian conditioning, operant conditioning, reinforcement, stimulus control of behaviour, types of memory, self-control and observational learning, and behavioural paradigms used in contemporary research on learning and memory."
PSYC 354 "Evolutionary Foundations of Psychology " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, previously or concurrently. This course examines the ways that evolutionary thought has influenced the study of behaviour. Fundamental evolutionary processes are introduced, and ideas about how those processes may have shaped human and animal behaviour are considered. Additional topics include biological and cognitive continuity among species, sources of individual differences in behavioural traits, evolutionarily stable strategies and states, methods of testing evolutionary hypotheses about behaviour, and the comparative method in psychology."
PSYC 355 "Fundamentals of Behavioural Neurobiology" "Prerequisite: BIOL 200, BIOL 201, BIOL 202, Cegep Biology 301, Cegep Biology 101-NYA, or Cegep Biology 921. This course provides an introduction to the neural mechanisms that underlie behaviour. Topics include the structure and function of neurons, neural communication, an introduction to neuroanatomy and endocrinology, and the processing of sensory information. Students also learn how complex systems, such as the sensory and motor systems, interact to produce behaviour."
PSYC 363 "Fundamentals of Sensation and Perception" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, previously or concurrently. This course introduces the physiological and psychological mechanisms of sensation and perception. Thorough treatment is given to questions of how information about the world is acquired through visual and auditory systems, and other modalities, that together is used with stored information to create an ongoing mental representation of the world. Topics such as pitch perception, colour vision, perception of movement, size and space perception, illusions, and distance are covered."
PSYC 364 "Fundamentals of Cognition" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, previously or concurrently. This course introduces cognitive psychology. Theoretical perspectives and experimental findings that inform the current understanding of how humans acquire, represent, and use knowledge are presented and discussed. Topics include attention, memory, categorization, language, and thinking. This course allows students to gain familiarity with topics and concepts necessary to pursue advanced studies in cognition."
PSYC 372 "Personnel Psychology" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, previously or concurrently. This course focuses on the contributions of psychology to several human resource considerations in organizations. Topics include personnel selection, training methods, personnel appraisal, and career development. This is an applied area of psychology, and therefore the interplay between theory, research, and application is emphasized."
PSYC 374 "Organizational Psychology" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, previously or concurrently. Understanding psychology can help organizations reach their goals, retain their workforce, and make themselves attractive to future employees and investors. This applied psychology course focuses on research and theories relevant to the behaviour of managers and employees. Topics include the history of Industrial/Organizational(I/O) psychology; organizational development and communication; motivation, personality, and leadership; employee satisfaction and commitment; group behaviour; negotiation and conflict resolution; and job stress."
PSYC 387 "Directed Research in Psychology" "Prerequisite: PSYC 311, 316; permission of the Department. Under the supervision of a faculty member, typically from within the Department, the student carries out an independent research project and completes a written report. The area of study is decided upon through consultation with the faculty member."
PSYC 420 "The Self in Social Context" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 325. This course addresses a wide range of theoretical and empirical approaches to the self in contemporary social psychology. Self-esteem and self-concept are addressed in terms of social context, personal and social norms, affective experience, and interpersonal behaviour. Other topics covered may include narcissism, self-presentation, self-regulation, egocentrism, and limits to self-knowledge. Issues relating to gender, gender identity, and the development of gender roles and gender differences in the social context may also be discussed."
PSYC 423 "Emotion " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; 321 or 325. This course addresses models of emotion and individual differences in emotion and mood. The subject of how emotion influences attention, memory, evaluation, and behaviour in the social domain is also considered. In addition, particular attention is paid to a number of specific emotions."
PSYC 424 "Cultural Psychology " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; 321 or 325. This course introduces cultural and cross-cultural perspectives in psychology. It focuses on theoretical assumptions and research methods specific to these perspectives, and covers research on the ways in which culture both emerges from, and shapes basic psychological processes. Specific topics include evolution and culture; cultural differences in self-concept and value systems; acculturation, cultural contact, and adaptation; culture and cognition; and cultural variation in psychopathology, health, and therapy."
PSYC 425 "Culture, Development, and the Self " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; 325 or 333. This course examines cultural variations in developmental processes and outcomes, especially as they are related to the self-concept. Following a presentation of the basic concepts in the understanding of development and of culture, particular domains of development are examined according to how they vary across cultural contexts. Examples of domains include moral development, parent-child interaction, education, and suicide. The overarching goal is to describe human development as taking place within a cultural milieu, the consequences of this perspective for fundamental issues in psychology and the social sciences, and the implications for the challenges of pluralism, globalization, and public policy."
PSYC 426 "Psychometrics and Individual Differences" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315. In this course, consideration is given to the general theory of psychological measurement and its application in the development and use of various psychometric instruments such as achievement, intelligence, aptitude, personality, and interest tests. Derived scores, norms, reliability, and validity of these instruments are discussed in the context of general measurement problems in psychology. Item analysis, signal-detection theory, diagnostics, and non-questionnaire methods may also be discussed."
PSYC 427 "Current Issues in Personality" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 321. This course critically examines selected contemporary issues in personality psychology with a focus on recent research findings. The importance of personality in explaining behaviours, personal beliefs, developmental outcomes, and quality of life is considered."
PSYC 428 "Social and Cultural Advanced Issues " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; and permission of the Department. This course addresses the most recent advanced issues of contemporary interest in social and cultural psychology. The main topic of the course changes from one term to the next. Potential topics include social cognition, aggression and violence, experimental-existential psychology, social-cultural neuroscience, or culture and evolution. Students should consult with the Psychology Department for information on the central course topic for the current year."
PSYC 431 "Infancy" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 333. This course provides a comprehensive account of psychological development in infancy. Aspects of infant development such as physical, perceptual, cognitive, verbal, emotional, and social development are covered. Theoretical perspectives and research methods specific to the study of infant development are emphasized."
PSYC 432 "Childhood Development" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 333. This course provides an analysis of theories pertaining to the basic processes of development during early childhood and school-age periods. A broad range of theoretical positions and methodological strategies are presented. Emphasis is on physical, cognitive, emotional, social, and personality development and the origins of individual differences in adjustment and well-being. Particular attention is given to cultural variability in development and to developmental differences between girls and boys."
PSYC 433 "Adolescent Development" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 333. This course provides an overview of theory and research relating to multiple domains of development during adolescence. Topics include hormonal processes, physical and cognitive development, peer and parent-adolescent relations, family processes, gender roles, identity formation, sexuality, delinquency, drug abuse, suicide, and psychological disorders in adolescents. When possible, topics are considered from cross-cultural and historical perspectives."
PSYC 434 "Aging" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 333. This course covers recent developments in the psychology of aging. Topics include age-related changes in physiology, biology, and in sensory and cognitive functioning. Particular attention is given to the effects of these age-related changes on behaviour, personality, interpersonal functioning, gender roles, coping, and adjustment. Methodological considerations in aging research are also discussed."
PSYC 435 "Developmental Psychopathology " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; 333 or 340. Using principles of developmental and clinical psychology, this survey course focuses primarily on understanding the pathways to abnormal adjustment in childhood and adolescence. The origins of deviant and competent behaviour are examined, with special attention to the multiplicity of possible risk factors and causal processes, assessment of problems and diagnoses, and the efficacy of interventions. Students are also introduced to a number of behavioural problems such as attention-deficit and hyperactivity disorder; aggression, externalizing problems, and disruptive behaviour disorders; internalizing problems, anxiety, and mood disorders; learning disabilities; mental retardation; and autism."
PSYC 438 "Developmental Advanced Issues" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; and permission of the Department. This course addresses the most recent advanced issues of contemporary interest in developmental psychology. The main topic of the course changes from one term to the next. Potential topics include social, cognitive, language, or personality development. Students should consult with the Psychology Department for information on the central course topic for the current year."
PSYC 440 "Psychopathology: Mood, Anxiety, and Personality Disorders" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 340. This course presents a focused and thorough investigation of mood and anxiety disorders. Problems studied include depressive, bipolar, and anxiety disorders. Relevant somatoform (e.g. hypochondriasis) and personality (e.g. avoidant, dependent) disorders may also be discussed. Topics include contemporary theory, classification issues, and ongoing controversies, with an emphasis on current research."
PSYC 441 "Psychopathology: Schizophrenia and Neurocognitive Disorders " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 340. This course presents a focused and thorough investigation of schizophrenia and the neurocog-nitive disorders. Problems studied include schizophrenia and related psychotic disorders (e.g. delusional disorder, schizoaffective disorder), as well as dementia and other disorders of aging. Relevant personality (e.g. paranoid, schizotypal) disorders may also be discussed. Topics include contemporary theory, classification issues, and ongoing controversies, with an emphasis on current research."
PSYC 442 "Psychopathology: Behaviour Regulation Disorders " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 340. This course presents a focused and thorough investigation of psychopathology resulting from disorders of behaviour regulation. Problems studied include eating, substance use, and impulse-control disorders. Relevant sexual, gambling, and personality (e.g. borderline, antisocial) disorders may also be discussed. Topics include contemporary theory, classification issues, and current controversies, with an emphasis on current research."
PSYC 443 "Psychological Intervention Models " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 340. This course presents a focused and thorough investigation of major approaches to psychological intervention. It focuses on general principles of therapy, research methods for the study of process and outcome, and the contrasts between various theories and modalities. Topics include cognitive behavioural therapy, psychodynamic psychotherapy, humanistic-existential therapy, couples and family therapy, group therapy, and motivational interviewing. Professional and ethical issues pertaining to clinical psychologists and clinical psychology research may also be discussed."
PSYC 444 "Hypnosis and Dissociation " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 340. This course critically examines research, theory, and methodological approaches relating to a number of selected issues of contemporary interest in the area of hypnosis and dissociative phenomena. Experimental and applied research on selected topics such as recovered memory, dissociation, pain and psychosomatic disorders, social and cognitive correlates of hypnotic responses, and the issue of coercion is reviewed. The forensic and clinical uses and abuses of hypnosis are surveyed and contrasted to experimental findings."
PSYC 445 "Human Neuropsychology" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 355. This course is a general introduction to human neuropsychology. Topics discussed include principles of brain organizations and function, human neuroimaging and recording techniques, the contribution of clinical patients and single case studies, selected neurological disorders, and cognitive neuroscience. Emphasis is on how these issues can be meaningfully related to human behaviour, emotion, sensory perception, and higher cognitive processes."
PSYC 446 "Stress" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 355; 340 or 341. This course examines how the evolutionary and adaptive stress response has come to contribute to health and pathology in modern society. The major endocrine, neurobiological, and cognitive underpinnings of the stress response are covered, and current stress research is discussed. Topics include the role of stress in aging, memory, depression, drug abuse, post-traumatic stress disorder, and the consequences of exposure to stress and adversity."
PSYC 447 "Current Issues in Health Psychology" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 341. This course offers a focused treatment of selected advanced topics in health psychology. Potential topics include psychosocial and environmental antecedents of disease, adaptation to medical illness, approaches to improve health and manage disease, pediatric psychology, and mechanisms by which psychosocial and environmental characteristics get inside the body to influence health."
PSYC 448 "Clinical Advanced Issues " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; and permission of the Department. This course addresses the most recent advanced issues of contemporary interest in clinical psychology. The main topic of the course changes from one term to the next. Potential topics include neurobiology of psychopathology, functional somatic syndromes, personality and psychopathology, psychotherapy process research, or epidemiology of psychological disorders. Students should consult with the Psychology Department for information on the central course topic for the current year."
PSYC 450 "Neurobiology of Drug Abuse and Addiction" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 355. This course focuses on the behavioural and neuronal mechanisms involved in drug abuse and addiction. It provides students with a solid conceptual foundation of how drugs of abuse affect the brain and behaviour. Topics such as the pharmacology of drugs of abuse, drug-induced neuronal plasticity in brain regions related to motivation and reward, and the interaction between biological factors and environmental events in addiction are discussed."
PSYC 451 "Neurobiology of Learning and Memory" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 351, 355. This course deals with some of the major questions about the neural bases of learning and memory. A number of mechanisms subserving learning and memory are investigated, including models based on relatively simple nervous systems (e.g. conditioning in Aplysia), as well as more complex systems (e.g. the neuronal mechanisms mediating eyeblink conditioning in the rabbit and the neuronal pathways that mediate reinforcement). Other topics may include the anatomical bases of memory, including the role of the hippocampus in spatial memory, and the role of the NMDA receptor in learning and memory."
PSYC 452 "Neurobiology of Sensation and Perception" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 355, 363. This course examines the relationship between the structures of the sensory systems and perception. Topics include how the structure of the eye and ear determine how and what is seen and heard, the modularity of cortical organization, segregation and integration of visual information, PDP and other models, bottom-up and top-down processing, and the reconstruction of the perceptual world."
PSYC 453 "Neurobiology of Motivated Behaviour" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 355. This course examines the neural mechanisms that mediate motivated behaviour, and provides an introduction to concepts such as goal-directed behaviour and incentive motivation. Other topics include pleasure and pain; ingestive behaviour; sexual and reproductive behaviour; aggression; temperature regulation; and sleep, arousal, and biological rhythms."
PSYC 454 "Hormones and Behaviour" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 355. This course deals with the role of hormones in integrating the activity of various neural, endocrine, and sensory systems to bring about organized, purposeful behaviour. Topics include reproductive, sexual, or environmentally adaptive systems. Treatment of material ranges from the molecular to the behavioural level."
PSYC 455 "Neuropharmacology " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 355. This course focuses on neurochemistry and neuropharmacology relating to synaptic transmission. The chemistry and pharmacology of each major class of neurotransmitters is discussed. The pharmacological and psychological bases of drug actions are also explored, to provide an understanding of pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and pharmacotherapeutics, as they relate to issues such as CNS disease, affective disorders, and the treatment of pain. This course is primarily intended for students wishing to pursue advanced graduate work in neuroscience or clinical psychology, or for those who are seeking to enter the health professions."
PSYC 456 "Functional Neuroanatomy " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 355. This course focuses on the structural and functional anatomy of brain systems underlying important cognitive functions such as motor behaviour, sensory perception, learning, and memory. Emphasis is on how comparative anatomy and different experimental techniques contribute to the understanding of brain function. Through discussion of the results of anatomical, physiological, and neuroimaging studies, students develop an in-depth knowledge of the structure and function of the human brain."
PSYC 457 "Foundations of Animal Behaviour" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 355. This course explores the bases underlying the study of animal behaviour as they relate to the study of psychobiology and evolutionary psychology. Topics may include reproductive strategies, communication, the effects of early experience, learning and cognition, and the mechanisms of orientation navigation and homing in animals. Behaviour genetics, theory of evolution, basic ethological concepts, and methodological issues are also discussed."
PSYC 458 "Behavioural Neuroscience Advanced Issues " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; and permission of the Department. This course addresses the most recent advanced issues of contemporary interest in behavioural neuroscience. The main topic of the course changes from one term to the next. Potential topics include examination of the current state of scientific study of motivation or a focused look at memory consolidation. Students should consult with the Psychology Department for information on the central course topic for the current year."
PSYC 460 "Vision" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 363. This course builds on the introduction to the visual system developed in PSYC 363. Topics are examined from the psychophysical, computational, and physiological perspectives and may include advanced treatment of colour, motion, and texture perception; spatial vision; object, face, and scene recognition; eye movement control; flow fields; attention; and perception-in-action."
PSYC 461 "Computational Modelling of Human Cognition " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; 363 or 364. This course reviews the history of the view of mind as machine and the various computational metaphors that have helped in understanding the particular kind of computational device the brain is. The course explores the ways in which computational models of mind are implemented and can be tested against psychological theories and data. Students learn how to construct simplified representations of reality based on rule-based processes to recreate aspects of human cognition."
PSYC 462 "Memory and Attention " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 364. This course provides an advanced introduction to theories and empirical research on memory and attention. Topics include various memory systems and mechanisms, including long- and short-term memory, working, episodic, and semantic memory. The course also addresses research on attentional processes such as switching, selective, and divided attention."
PSYC 463 "Concepts and Categories " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 364. This course provides an advanced introduction to theories of conceptual representation and processes of categorization. It reviews the empirical research in these fields, including studies with normal and impaired populations."
PSYC 464 "Judgment and Decision Making " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 364. This course is an introduction to the cognitive and affective processes involved in evaluating options and choosing between them. Major theories and empirical studies are reviewed from an interdisciplinary perspective that includes both cognitive science and neuroscience and that draws on research carried out on humans and on other animals."
PSYC 465 "Language" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 364. This course covers the cognitive, developmental, and social aspects of language and human communication. Topics may include linguistic theory, language acquisition, language comprehension and production, the biological bases of language, reading, speech perception, and second-language development."
PSYC 466 "Cognitive Development " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; 333 or 364. This course provides an advanced introduction to the development of childrens thinking, from infancy through the elementary-school years. The goal of the course is to familiarize students with recent theory and research on the cognitive development in children. Topics include the development of language, perception, concept, social cognition, and memory."
PSYC 467 "Learning" "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315, 351. This course is a continuation of PSYC 351; it presents a more focused and thorough treatment of more advanced topics in learning. These may include developmental aspects of learning, animal memory and cognition, human applications of conditioning principles, biological constraints on learning, and the physiology of learning and memory. Different sections of the course may cover different sets of topics."
PSYC 468 "Cognitive Science Advanced Issues " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; and permission of the Department. This course addresses the most recent advanced issues of contemporary interest in cognitive science. The main topic of the course changes from one term to the next. Possible topics include memory, attention, concept formation, category representation, decision-making, reasoning, language, intelligence, creativity, skill acquisition, cognitive and language development, or the neural bases of cognitive functioning. Students should consult with the Psychology Department for information on the central course topic for the current year."
PSYC 483 "Directed Readings in Psychology" "Prerequisite: PSYC 311, 316; permission of the Department. This course is designed for the advanced student wishing to do independent, individually supervised literature research on a specific topic in psychology. This research culminates in a written report. Students should have a well-defined topic and a faculty supervisor, typically selected from within the Psychology Department, before registering for this course."
PSYC 485 "Specialization Project " "Prerequisite: PSYC 311, 316; permission of the Department. This seminar provides students with experience in the design, conduct, analysis, and reporting of independent research in the major areas of psychology. The research is undertaken under the supervision of a faculty member."
PSYC 487 "Advanced Directed Research in Psychology " "Prerequisite: PSYC 310, 315; 485 or 495; and permission of the Department. This course is for students who have completed a specialization project or honours thesis and wish to conduct an additional research project. Under the supervision of a faculty member, typically from within the Department, the student carries out an independent research project and completes a written report. The area of study is decided upon through consultation with the faculty member."
PSYC 490 "Honours Seminar Topics" "Prerequisite: PSYC 311, 316; permission of the Department. The aim of this seminar is to provide a forum for the discussion of topics relating to current knowledge, theory, and methods in psychology, and to help students achieve a critical understanding of psychology. Topics may include learning, interpersonal relations, human development, perception, cognition, subjective well-being, or language. Emphasis is on current theory as it relates to selected topics within psychology."
PSYC 491 "Honours Seminar Issues " "Prerequisite: PSYC 311, 316; permission of the Department. The aim of this seminar is to provide a forum for the discussion of issues relating to current knowledge, theory, and methods in psychology, and to help students achieve a critical understanding of psychology. Issues may include social and developmental processes, motivation, emotion, or the biological bases of behaviour. Selected issues from these areas are discussed from theoretical perspectives specific to given phenomena."
PSYC 495 "Honours Thesis" "Prerequisite: PSYC 311, 316. Open to final-year honours students with permission of the Department. This course requires the student to propose and conduct a study, and submit a thesis written according to the APA format. Students are also required to give an oral presentation in class on their proposal and on their final thesis. The work is supervised by a faculty member selected by the student, typically from within the Psychology Department."
RELI 209 "The Religious Imagination " "This course explores the conceptual elements that underlie the religious experience. These elements include the notion of the sacred, beliefs, cosmologies and myths, the origins and understanding of evil, ethics and salvation."
RELI 210 "" "This course focuses on the day-to-day practice of religious traditions. Included are the expression of religious experiences through art, music, and scripture; transmission of these religious expressions through ritual, worship and mystical/ecstatic practices; and the construction and maintenance of different types of religious authority and communal identities."
RELI 214 "Religions of the West" "This course surveys the history, doctrines, institutions, and practices of religions that arose in Western Asia, including Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. The course examines contemporary forms of religious life in those parts of the world where these traditions have spread, as well as indigenous religions. The course explores the religious activities and experiences of both women and men within these various traditions."
RELI 215 "Religions of Asia" "This course surveys the history, doctrines, institutions, and practices of religions that have arisen in and spread throughout Asia, including Hinduism, Buddhism, and the religions of China and Japan. The course explores the religious activities and experiences of both women and men within these traditions."
RELI 216 "Encountering Religions" "This course serves as an introduction to some of the religions of todays world, and explores several contemporary contexts where people of diverse religious backgrounds come into contact with one another."
RELI 220 "Introduction to Judaism" "This course examines the continuities and changes in Jewish society, institutions, concepts, and traditions from ancient times to the present. It also provides an introduction to Jewish practice and belief in its contemporary diversity, including a survey of the rituals, symbols, and ceremonies of Jews today."
RELI 223 "Introduction to Christianity" "This course provides an introductory survey of key developments and enduring structures in the historical evolution of Christianity. It examines the variety of expressions of faith embodied in different churches, and traces the ways in which beliefs, institutions, symbols, and rituals have in the past and continue today to carry forward the Christian tradition as a world religion in a variety of cultural contexts."
RELI 224 "Introduction to Islam" "This course explores the religious tradition of Islam through the beliefs and practices of the vast number of Muslims scattered throughout the world  in the Middle East, South and Southeast Asia, North America, and other places. It examines the scriptures and common rituals or pillars of the religion, as well as expressions of life and culture in the past and present such as the law (shariah), mystical orders, and the arts."
RELI 225 "Introduction to Hinduism" "This course surveys Hinduism in its diverse history, sects, schools of thought, sacred texts, spiritual practices, and contemporary interpretations. Students focus on several prominent dimensions of the tradition, including the Hindu temple, mysticism and metaphysics in the Upanishads, karma and rebirth, dharma (religious duty and the cosmic/social order), moksha (liberation), gender and caste, devotional traditions, and narrative literatures."
RELI 226 "Introduction to Buddhism" "This course introduces students to the diversity of forms of Buddhism that have emerged in history and are practised today. It examines those aspects that are shared in common by Buddhists all over the world, including reverence for the Buddha, support of the monastic order, and adherence to the Buddhas teachings. The course explores the ways in which these ideals and beliefs are expressed through such Buddhist practices as worship, study, pilgrimage, and meditation."
RELI 227 "Introduction to Iranian Civilization" "Iran has played a central role in world history, giving rise to Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism, and the Bahai faith, as well as numerous minor sects. Iranian culture has also played a major role in informing and transforming Judaism, Christianity, Buddhism and Islam. This course covers the long history of Iranian civilization and its influence on peoples from the Mediterranean world to South and East Asia in the realms of religion, literature, architecture, and the arts."
RELI 230 "Judaism and Popular Culture" "This course explores examples of American popular culture  film, television, comedy, graphic novels  from the early-20th to the early-21st century that touch on Jews and Judaism. The course reveals ways in which Judaism has developed in the past century and the nature of a uniquely Jewish current that has developed a life of its own in the sphere of popular culture."
RELI 231 "Jews and Food" "This course introduces students to the link between Jews and food. It explores the interrelationship between sacred texts, cookbooks, film, fiction, and current theories on ethnic foodways. The study of foodways is a growing field that yields insight into the patterns of group formation, cultural development and communal identity. Judaism provides a good case study of these variables."
RELI 233 "Introduction to Women and Religion" "This introduction to the particular problems and issues in the study of women and religion uses case studies from various religious traditions. The course presents a survey of the different levels of participation, the complex ritual activities, and the intriguing divine imagery associated with women that are found in many religious traditions. Questions pertaining to the contemporary feminist discourse on such topics as witchcraft, matriarchy, and goddess religions are also explored."
RELI 235 "(also listed as HIST 235) " " The Holocaust"
RELI 298 "Selected Topics in Religion" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
RELI 300 "Cults and New Religious Movements in North America" "This course takes a sociological and historical approach towards understanding new religious movements (NRMs), popularly known as cults. The course examines the reasons for their controversial status in society, and undertakes a survey of the beliefs, rituals, leadership, membership, recruitment strategies, and social organization of a number of specific NRMs."
RELI 301 "The Hebrew Bible" "This course introduces students to one of the great works of world literature, the Hebrew Bible. It familiarizes the student with the major genres of the Hebrew Bible and with the history, culture, and religion of ancient Israel. Particular attention is given to modern scholarly methods of interpretation, to the literary dimensions of the Bible, and to the subsequent development of Jewish interpretation and practice that builds on the Bible."
RELI 302 "Biblical Studies II: Christian Origins" "A critical survey of Christian origins, this course focuses on New Testament literature and considers historical setting, history of text, religious and cultural significance. Attention is paid to extra-canonical literature and other relevant sources."
RELI 305 "Classical Persian Literature " "Readings of selected poetry and prose allow students to explore the language, thought, and culture of Iranian civilization. All readings are in English translation; no knowledge of Persian required."
RELI 306 "Religion and Society in Contemporary Iran" "Heir to one of the worlds great civilizations, Iran today is often viewed negatively by the West. However, the reality of life in the Islamic Republic differs in many ways from popular conceptions. This course explores the roots, development and current situation of a uniquely modern and dynamic contemporary Muslim society. Topics include gender relations, political theory, contemporary literature and the arts."
RELI 307 "Christian Mystics " "Based on the study of significant texts, this course offers a historical and sociological exploration of the range of mystical and ecstatic experiences within the Christian tradition. Special consideration is given to the role which gender plays in understanding these experiences."
RELI 308 "Christianity in the United States: History and Practice " "This course introduces students to the history of Christianity in the United States, from the 1630s to the present, with an emphasis on the modern period. It traces how the U.S. has become the most religious country in the developed world and explores how Americans understand and practice Christianity. It covers key historical moments and movements, including Puritanism, revivals and awakenings, missions, abolition and slavery, fundamentalism, anti-Communism and Pentecostalism."
RELI 310 "Self and Other: Identity and Ethical Development" "This course considers ethical issues arising in the context of personal and interpersonal relations, families and friendships, and health and medical care. These issues are discussed in relation to traditional and contemporary moral perspectives, both religious and non-religious. Topics covered may vary from year to year, but may include discussions of conscience and career, privacy, sexual relations, harassment, substance abuse, abortion, euthanasia, and gay and lesbian relations."
RELI 311 "Global Christianity" "Christianitys centre has shifted to the global south. This course examines contemporary Christianity in its many forms around the world. It pays special attention to how people, ideas and ministries cross borders and the implications of globalization for Christian practice and theology. Topics covered may include televangelism and media, Internet religion, pilgrimage, immigration, refugees and transplanted religion, mega-church networks, post-colonial missions and reverse missionaries, Pentacostalism and the rise of African and Asian Independent Churches."
RELI 312 "Justice and Social Conflict in a Globalized World" "This course considers ethical issues arising in the context of social, legal, and political relations. These issues are discussed in relation to both traditional and contemporary moral perspectives, both religious and non-religious. Topics covered typically include discussions of social and economic inequality, welfare, poverty, just punishment, business ethics, public ethics, economic development, and sustainable development."
RELI 313 "Zoroastrianism" "Zoroastrianism, an ancient but little-known faith now counting no more than a few hundred thousand practitioners living mainly in India and Iran, is one of the most significant traditions in the history of religions. It provided a world-view and ethical framework later adopted by Judaism, Christianity, and Islam and shares significant common roots with Hinduism. The Zoroastrians of India  the Parsis  have continued to play an influential role in shaping that countrys development in modern times. This course covers the 3,000-year history of Zoroastrianism, including controversies surrounding its origins, its contributions to other religions, its eventual decline and the surviving global Zoroastrian diaspora of contemporary times."
RELI 315 "Muslim Cultures in Southern Asia" "About one-third of the worlds Muslims live in India, Pakistan, or Bangladesh, making Southern Asia the world region with the largest proportion of Muslims. Yet many aspects of Muslim belief and practice in these countries have a distinctively South Asian flavour and in some cases derive from regional cultural traditions. This course looks at the history of Muslim presence in Southern Asia, including its extensive political and cultural impact from the seventh century to the present, and investigates the complexities of communal identity over the course of that history. The role of Sufism and Muslim contributions to South Asian literature, art, architecture, and music are also explored."
RELI 316 "Classical Islam" "The course explores the various aspects of Muslim civilization from its initial spread from Arabia to Spain, sub-Saharan Africa, India, and China, up to the age of the Ottoman, Safavid, and Mughal empires in the 16th and 17th centuries. Special attention is given to the emergence of schools of law, theology, philosophy, and mystical orders, as well as the literature, arts, and architecture of diverse Muslim societies."
RELI 317 "Sufism" "The course explores the emergence and development of Islamic mysticism, beginning with pious individuals in the eighth century and coalescing into institutional forms by the 10th. Attention is given to the teachings of key mystical figures, the Sufi orders, and the social role of Sufism. Sufi poetry, music, and other forms of devotion and practice are studied in the contexts of diverse Muslim societies over the past 1,000 years."
RELI 318 "Shiite Islam" "This course explores the history and ideas of Shiism, from the inception of the movement to the present. The various sects are introduced and studied, including the Twelvers, Ismailis, Druze, and Alawites. Shiite doctrines related to esoterism, quietism, and messianism are considered in comparison with other religions, while study of the modern period treats subjects such as theocracy, political activism, and martyrdom."
RELI 319 "Modern Islam" "This course surveys some of the questions raised by modernity for Muslims and the various responses Muslims have sought to formulate and put into practice. Issues addressed may include government, law, gender, relations with the West, and religious authority."
RELI 320 "The Making of Christianity" "This course examines how Christianity emerged from a small, splinter movement within Judaism to become the religion of the Roman Empire. It traces the various debates that gave shape to this new movement, stressing the diverse perspectives evident in early Christian sources. Among the topics considered are Jewish and Christian relations, martyrdom and persecution, prophecy and visionary experience, orthodoxy and heresy, gender, sexuality and the body, canon and religious authority, as well as sacred space."
RELI 321 "The Medieval Christian World" "This course examines one of the more significant periods in the development of Christianity, that of the Medieval West. Among the topics considered are the papacy, the growth of monasticism and the friars movements, mysticism, the Crusades, the emergence of scholastic learning and the universities, and forms of popular religiosity, such as devotion to saints and pilgrimages."
RELI 322 "Christian Reformers and the Rise of Modernity" "This course explores Christianitys central role in the creation of modernity from the 16th to the 19th centuries, illustrating how this period of unprecedented discovery and change forever altered the shape of the Christian faith. Topics under consideration include European colonialism, Christian missions to the New World, the Protestant Reformation, the birth of the nation state, the Enlightenment, emergence of capitalism, and the rise of modern science."
RELI 324 "On the Margins of Christianity" "This course examines marginal forms of Christianity that have found themselves ignored, excluded, or suppressed by more mainstream Christian groups and institutions. Topics may include heretical, apocalyptic, millenarian, and charismatic movements. The course considers the practices, self-understanding, and worldviews of marginal forms of Christianity within their particular cultural, political, and historical contexts."
RELI 325 "Leaders, Rebels and Saints" "This course, which varies in focus from year to year, investigates the lives of controversial or influential women and men in the history of different religious traditions. Going beyond mere biography, the course situates particular figures within their social and cultural contexts, while dealing with how such prominent figures were viewed, portrayed, and used by others. Specific topics for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule; examples are Moses, Jesus and Mary."
RELI 326 "Ancient Judaism" "This course is a survey of Jewish religion, culture, and literature in its formative period, from the fifth century Before the Common Era to the 10th century of the Common Era. The focus is on key moments, movements, and cultural motifs that demonstrate the ways in which Jewish groups were both part of their larger cultural world and distinctive; both divided into a variety of groups, but also united."
RELI 327 "Medieval Jewish Thought and Institutions" "This course examines the intellectual, religious, and social history of selected Jewish communities during the Middle Ages. Both internal Jewish developments and changing Jewish relations with their non-Jewish neighbours are considered."
RELI 328 "Modern Judaism" "This course surveys the major historical events, sociological and political forces, and intellectual currents which shaped Judaism in the modern period as well as the ways that Jewish communities responded to these forces. Among the topics explored are Emancipation, forms of religious adjustment, anti-semitism, the experience of Jewish communities in Russia and North America, the Holocaust, and Zionism and the state of Israel."
RELI 329 "Israel: Religion and State" "This course studies the emergence and development of the state of Israel, from the beginnings of the Zionist movement to the present time. It also explores the major political, social, and intellectual developments in both the pre- and post-state periods. The role of Judaism within the changing state is a primary focus."
RELI 331 "Literature and the Holocaust" "Religious, historical, literary, and political contexts have been applied to come to terms with the events of the Holocaust. All of these are relevant as students read important and provocative novels dealing with such issues as ethics, the relationship between art and history, the use of humour and popular cultural forms, as well as the way that storytelling helps direct our understanding of events that are often said to be incomprehensible. The wider impact of fiction dealing with the Holocaust on the popular media, including film, CD-ROMs, video, and news reporting, is also considered."
RELI 332 "Canadian Jewish Literature" "This course explores the Jewish voice in Canadian literature which can be seen to be the first opening toward a multicultural tradition in this country. Writers such as A.M. Klein, Mordecai Richler, Henry Kreisel, and Leonard Cohen created an English-language tradition of Jewish writing that is varied, provocative, and lively. Students look at novels, short stories, some poetry, memoir, and criticism. Students also consider non-Jewish authors, such as Gwethalyn Graham and Mavis Gallant, who were among the first to write about Jewish characters for an English-speaking Canadian audience. This course allows students to consider issues related to Canadian identity and culture, ethnic studies, and multiculturalism alongside literary questions."
RELI 333 "Stories in Judaism" "In this course, stories are read from the entire scope of Jewish history  from the Bible to modern Jewish film and fiction. Each of these stories will reveal something about the cultures from which they emerged  their fantasies about themselves and about others; about humans, not-so-humans, and God; about life and death and everything in between. Taken together, these stories tell the story of Judaism, in all its inexhaustible variety and colour."
RELI 334 "Introduction to Canadian Jewish Studies" "This course introduces the history of the Canadian Jewish community and the themes, personalities, and media which have contributed to Canadian Jewish culture and life. Students explore historical texts, novels, films, and museums in order to gain a sense of the particularity of Jewish culture in Canada and its place in the Canadian multicultural ethic. The relationship of Canadian Jewry to communities in the United States, Europe, and Israel, and to its own past, is also examined."
RELI 336 "Jews in Arab Lands" "This course studies the social and religious life of the diverse communities of Jews in Arab lands. Topics may include Jewish life under Islam; the experience of expulsions and dispersions; North African and Middle Eastern Jewish traditions; Sephardi life in the Americas, Europe, and Israel. In addition, some of the philosophical, Halakhic, biblical, and mystical works of Sephardi Jews are examined."
RELI 337 "The Dead Sea Scrolls" "The discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls changed our understanding of early Judaism and shed new light on Christian origins. The Scrolls preserve the oldest copies of the books that would come to be included in the Hebrew Bible, plus hundreds of other Jewish writings of the Hellenistic and early Roman eras: apocalypses, biblical interpretation and apocryphal stories, community rules, hymns and poems, legal and liturgical texts, wisdom literature, and much more. This course provides students with a basic introduction to the Dead Sea Scrolls  the texts, the community, and their ideas  examined in the larger context of early Judaism."
RELI 339 "The Impact of the Holocaust on Religious Thought" "This course examines the ramifications of the Holocaust in Jewish and Christian thought. Issues discussed include the problem of evil; suffering; the election of Israel; Gods relation to the course of human events."
RELI 340 "The Veda, Upanishads, and Religion in Ancient India" "This introduction to the religious concepts, practices, and wisdom of ancient India is based on the literature of the Vedic period, including the Upanishads. The course examines the contribution of various aspects of the Vedic tradition to the development of Hinduism, and explores the interaction among religions in the ancient period."
RELI 343 "Yoga in History, Thought, and Practice " "This course examines the history, thought, and practices of Yoga in their religious and cultural contexts. In the modern West, Yoga has become popular as a secular form of exercise. However, as this course shows, the diverse Yoga traditions of India have also involved sophisticated analyses of the mind and systems of meditation. Intrinsic to no single religion, Yoga has had roles in most South Asian traditions, including Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sufism or Islamic mysticism. The course surveys this rich history, and the various forms of meditative and physical discipline Yoga has entailed."
RELI 344 "Hindu Myth and Narrative: the Epics and Puranas " "This course approaches Hinduism through its narrative literature, especially the great epics (the "
RELI 346 "Gandhi, Colonialism, and Beyond " "This course concerns Hindu traditions in the modern world, beginning with the period of colonial British rule in South Asia. Students examine the writings and historical contexts of influential Hindu reformers, intellectuals, and activists, including Ram Mohun Roy, Dayananda Sarasvati, Swamy Vivekananda, the Tagores, V.D. Savarkar, and especially Mahatma Gandhi. Issues of focus include the history of the modern idea of Hinduism, responses to European thought and institutions (including Christianity), Hindu understandings of modernity, social change and reform, religious nationalism, contemporary gurus and their transnational movements, and Hinduism in the diaspora."
RELI 347 "Religion and the Arts in South and Southeast Asia" "This course is an introduction to the religious art of South and Southeast Asia, including an examination of Hindu, Buddhist, and Islamic architecture, sculpture, painting, and performing arts. The course examines the ways in which sacred art is related to myth and symbol, religious values and goals, ritual, religious experience, and social and political realities."
RELI 348 "Religion and Society in South and Southeast Asia" "This historical and sociological examination of religions impact on and intersection with the structures of South and Southeast Asian society, explores such issues as caste and class, gender and family relations, links between religion and the state, and relations between Hindu, Buddhist, and Muslim communities."
RELI 350 "Theravada Buddhism" "This course examines the early history, doctrine, institutions, and practices of Buddhism in India, and follows the development of Theravada Buddhism in the countries of Southeast Asia up to the present day."
RELI 351 "Jewish Eastern Europe" "This course takes into account the arrival of large numbers of Western European Jews in Poland and the Russian empire; the rise of Chasidism; the pre-World War II Yiddish cultural ferment; and political parties. The course focuses on recent developments: the rise of tourism to Eastern Europe; the historical, educational and memorial challenges associated with a reclamation of identity; and contemporary musical, religious and literary expressions."
RELI 353 "Religion and the Arts in the West" "This course explores the way in which the fine arts, literary arts, and performing arts have given expression to, and shaped the experience of, religious realities in the history of the West, and also considers the ways in which, in a more recent and contemporary context, art may be seen as engaging with aspects of divinity and spirituality."
RELI 354 "Religion and Film" "This course examines films that deal with religious themes  explicitly or implicitly  and provides an opportunity to analyze the language of film as a form of narrative through which cultural and religious ideas are transmitted."
RELI 355 "Religion and Violence " "This course explores how religion may be seen to engender or exacerbate violence, as well as the ways that religion may critique, prevent or even offer alternatives to violence. Sacred writings, theologies, rituals and communal actions of particular communities are studied, as well as notions of the self, the group, others, outsiders and enemies. In particular, the life-work and writings of such key figures as Mahatma Gandhi and Martin Luther King are studied in order to provide some religious perspectives on the relationship between non-violence and the resistance to injustice."
RELI 357 "Religion and the Public Square in North America " "This course examines how religion in Canada and America is contested and practised in the public square, for example, through political speeches, cultural events and ceremonies, in legal codes and in public places. Themes may vary from year to year."
RELI 358 "Anthropology of Religion " "This course introduces students to debates and themes that have coloured the anthropology of religion over the last century. After covering classic anthropological texts, it focuses on contemporary issues including self-reflexivity, power/agency, materiality and consumption, post-colonization, post-modernity/secularity and communitas."
RELI 360 "Religions of China" "This course concentrates on the historical development of Chinese religions from the earliest periods of Chinese civilization to contemporary times. It investigates the relationships among the classical religious traditions as portrayed through scriptures, commentaries, and rituals. Focus is placed on the unfolding of the five great religious currents of China: the classical imperial cults, Daoism, Confucianism, Buddhism, and popular cults."
RELI 361 "Religions of Japan" "This course uses a historical approach to understand the development of Japanese religious traditions. It investigates popular Japanese cults and religions, the assimilation of foreign religious thought and practices, and the implantation of Buddhism, Confucianism, and other models from China. Religious sectarianism, state-regulated religious schools, cults, and the role of religion in the establishment of Japanese national identity are also studied."
RELI 362 "Religions of Tibet" "The goal of this course is to familiarize students with current issues in Tibetan studies and to enhance understanding of Tibetan religion in Tibet, China and the rest of the world. It examines the nameless popular religions of Tibet, including mountain cults, shamanism, spirit possession and a variety of manifestations of popular religion. Students become familiar with the main schools of Tibetan Buddhism and the Bon religion, their history, dogma, lineages, philosophical enquiries, ritual and ascetic practices."
RELI 363 "Jainism " "This course provides an introduction to the religious culture of the Jain community. The early history of the Jain tradition in India is explored through a consideration of the life stories of the great teachers of the tradition, of the classical systems of Jain philosophy, cosmology and ethics, and of the rich traditions of Jain narrative literature and art. Contemporary Jainism, including the religious practices of monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen, and the contemporary relevance of Jainisms central precept of universal non-violence (ahimsa) are also studied."
RELI 364 "Mahayana Buddhism" "This course studies the origins and evolution of the Mahayana Buddhist in India, and the spread and growth of various Mahayana traditions in East Asia. It examines developments in texts, doctrine, philosophy, ethical ideals, practices (worship and meditation), and institutions."
RELI 365 "Religion and Literature" "This course examines how literary works assist in the understanding of religious traditions, and how literary texts can stand as reinterpretations of religious texts and beliefs in a number of religious traditions. Readings include canonical religious, literary, and critical texts. Consideration is given to how certain provocative books have created social and political unrest, as well as to how certain thinkers understand literary undertakings as expressions of religious modes of thought and creativity."
RELI 366 "Religion and Music" "This course explores sacred music in its religious and cultural contexts. It examines the ways in which religion has served as an inspiration and performance context for music across the world, and some of the ways in which musical expression has been central to religious practice. Topics range from Gregorian chant to Quranic recitation, from Hindu, Muslim, and Sikh devotional song in South Asia to esoteric Tibetan chant, and from J.S. Bach to Gospel singing in African-American churches."
RELI 367 "" "Ritual is one of the essential components of religious practice. This course explores the place and function of ritual in a variety of religious traditions, both historical and contemporary. It looks at theoretical understandings of religious ritual, and examines such rituals as sacrifice, rites of passage, worship and ascetic and meditative practices in their theological, social, and cultural contexts."
RELI 368 "Religion in Native Traditions" "This overview looks at the many diverse religious traditions of the First Nations populations in North America. The course examines the sacred stories, ceremonial patterns, life cycle rituals, and religious activities in their varied expressions. Consideration is given to the historical interaction of native government with religious practices."
RELI 370 "Topics in Comparative Religion" "This course treats various topics in comparative perspective, examining religious themes as they are represented in two or more religious traditions. Topics covered change from year to year, and may include comparative religious law, comparative ritual, comparative philosophy, or comparative ethics. Specific topics for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
RELI 371 "Health, Healing and Religion" "This course examines beliefs about health and healing in various religions and different periods of history. It examines the cultural systems linked to disease, pathology and health, along with ritualistic, meditative, hygienic and other strategies used to deal with sickness. The course explores concepts of health, longevity and the human body in relation to society, nature, and culturally conceived transcendent worlds."
RELI 372 "Religion and the Body" "This study of religious attitudes to the human body focuses on the body as a foundation for religious symbolism, religious community and identity, ritual, and religious experience. The course examines these problems with reference to various religious traditions. Issues examined include purification of the body; eating; mortification and mutilation of the body; attitudes towards dead bodies and physical immortality; attitudes towards bodies as gendered; embodied spirituality and incarnation."
RELI 373 "Introduction to Mysticism" "This course examines the concepts of mysticism articulated by contemporary scholarship. It then looks at mystical texts and experiences from a variety of religious traditions both comparatively and with respect to their position within the dynamic of their own traditions."
RELI 374 "Religion and Science" "How has religion viewed science, and how has science viewed religion? This course explores the relationship between religion and science both within particular religio-cultural contexts and in comparative perspective. The contexts considered may include those belonging to Christian, Jewish, Muslim, Hindu, or other Asian worldviews. Points of conflict and contact between scientific and religious discourses are also explored."
RELI 375 "Religions of Canada" "This course examines the role religions have played in the development of Canada as well as their influence in Canadian society, politics, and culture. Attention is paid as well to the interaction of different religious groups in the Canadian context."
RELI 376 "Psychology of Religion" "This survey looks at various perspectives and methods used in psychology as they are relevant to understanding the role and value of religion for the individual. The course examines the ideas of such figures as William James, Freud, and Jung, among others, and considers such topics as intense religious experience, conversion, images of God, myth and symbol, ritual, and religious and moral development."
RELI 378 "Death and Dying" "This course provides a comparative perspective on the variety of conceptions and practices related to death and dying that are found in different world religions. In addition, the course considers how people in contemporary North American society utilize traditional religious concepts and rituals, scientific understandings and medical procedures, or innovative combinations of ideas and practices with which to cope."
RELI 379 "Philosophy of Religion" "This course introduces students to some classical and contemporary discussions in the field of philosophy of religion. It explores such topics as the nature of religion, religious experience, faith and reason, religious language, religion and science, religious diversity, and religion and morality. It examines in what ways comparative philosophy of religion and feminist philosophy of religion challenge the very nature, parameters, and traditional questions of philosophy of religion as a whole."
RELI 380 "Religion and Sexuality" "This course examines, from a comparative and historical perspective, the interplay between religion and sexuality. It looks at the development of attitudes towards sexuality within diverse religious traditions, and religious manifestations of sexuality. Topics include, among others: human reproduction, gender roles and identity, birth control, abortion, celibacy, sexual variance, and homosexuality."
RELI 381 "Women and Religion: Judaism" "This course explores the status and religious roles of women within the Judaic tradition. Its focus is on the practice of the religion, especially the ritual and legal spheres. The relationship between common practice, popular attitudes, and formal legal principles is examined in order to inquire into issues of gender and religion."
RELI 382 "Women and Religion: Christianity" "The focus of the course is the role of women and the conflicting patterns of gender construction in the history of Christianity. Through a critical use of primary and secondary sources, both visual and textual, the course explores the sources of womens power and subordination in order to illuminate the relationship between gender and the Christian tradition."
RELI 383 "Women and Religion: Islam" "This course explores past and present debates among Muslims about the ideal status of women in Islam. The historical and legal background  the material of the debate  is examined first. The class then considers how a variety of discourses, ranging from conservative to Muslim-feminist, treat and manipulate this material."
RELI 384 "Women and Religion: Hinduism" "This course examines the roles and activities of Hindu women. Issues to be considered include the construction in history of models for the Hindu woman and the ways in which such models have shaped Hindu womens lives and experience, the religious activities of Hindu women, the contemporary concerns. The relation between abstract Hindu conceptions of the feminine  as a force to be revered, regulated, or repressed  and the actual circumstances and activities of Hindu women, both in the present and in the past, is discussed."
RELI 385 "Women and Religion: Buddhism" "This course explores the situation, activities, and experiences of women within Buddhism. Using an historical approach, the course examines the circumstances of women in early Buddhism, and traces subsequent developments in India, Tibet, Southeast Asia, the Far East, and the West, up to the present day."
RELI 386 "Witchcraft, Magic and Religion" "This course approaches the study of magic, witchcraft, and religion from a variety of perspectives. Taking examples from indigenous cultures, the ancient world, medieval Europe, the early modern period and contemporary movements, the practices and rituals that have been labelled magic or witchcraft are examined, along with the responses to them. The course explores how magicians and witches view themselves, how different cultures relate to them, and how magic, witchcraft, and religion merge and diverge."
RELI 387 "Goddesses and Religious Images of Women" "This comparative survey of female divinity and feminine imagery studies various religious traditions. Among the issues to be explored are the imaging of goddesses as mothers; the conception of forces like fertility, energy, materiality, and knowledge as feminine; the correspondences and relations between goddesses and women; and the contemporary feminist recovery of the Goddess."
RELI 388 "The Bible and Sexuality" "This course examines the wide variety of perspectives on sexuality within Scripture. It considers the ancient contexts in which these texts were composed as well as how Jews and/or Christians have read these texts over time, in light of changing notions of sexuality and gender. Among the topics considered are gendered and sexual identities, celibacy, marriage, same-sex relationships, human reproduction and child-rearing, and sexual desire. Ultimately, it addresses how the Bible reflects and has informed the various Jewish and/or Christian perspectives on these issues."
RELI 389 "Womens Ritual: Expressions and Expertise" "This comparative examination of the contexts and patterns of womens ritual lives looks at various religious traditions. In addition to considering womens activities in formal or public ritual contexts, this course focuses especially on the importance of women as ritual specialists and authorities in the context of the home."
RELI 390 "Angels and Demons in Judaism" "This course explores the Jewish version of the supernatural world. Students are introduced to the varieties of Jewish belief and experience that have existed from ancient times to today; the ways of thinking about Jewish and human experience that have shifted and evolved over time; and the different reasons why authors may choose to engage with the supernatural world."
RELI 391 "Women in Jewish History: Ancient and Medieval" "This course examines the lives and experiences of Jewish women from the late antique period through and including the medieval. Using primary and secondary materials, the class inquires into the varieties of womens encounter with history. The differences between communal standards and individual exploits are highlighted, as are geographic distinctions. Through a critical reading of Jewish sources and historians accounts, questions of methodology and theory are addressed."
RELI 392 "Women in Jewish History: Modern" "This course examines the lives and experiences of Jewish women in the modern period. The immigrations to North America and the subsequent development of the community provide the framework for investigating Jewish womens encounter with and contribution to modern Jewish life. The main focus is on North America, using primary sources such as fiction, biography, and autobiography. The influence of denominational differences and feminist challenges complete the survey."
RELI 393 "Women in Israel" "This course explores womens experience in the development of Israeli society. Students are introduced to the history, social planning, politics and religious authority that have shaped the current status of women in Israel."
RELI 394 "History of Satan: Evil Personified in Judaism and Christianity" "This course investigates the origins, development, and significance of Satan in early Judaism and the history of Christianity. Consideration is given to some of the most important literary and visual depictions of this figure from the ancient world through the Middle Ages to present day. The course sheds light on how intellectuals thought of this figure and also how Satan came to play an important role in popular culture down through the centuries."
RELI 395 "Studies in Jewish Thought and Philosophy" "By means of the analysis of particular issues, thinkers, and texts, this course explores the character of Jewish philosophy. Issues in Jewish philosophy that may be examined include the relationship between faith and reason, the understanding of God, Judaism and the inter-human, the powers and limits of philosophical understanding."
RELI 396 "Food and Religion" "This course examines food cultures and food rituals and explores religious meanings and the making of religious identities. The preparing and sharing of food defines religious community and expresses religious values. In looking at food in several world religions, this course focuses on how food can serve as a medium of transmission and transaction, and on the roles that women and men, gods and ancestors, and other beings and forces have in this network."
RELI 397 "Kabbalah and Jewish Mysticism " "This survey of kabbala, the Jewish mystical tradition, places emphasis on the study of representative Jewish mystical texts and socio-historical context for the developing mystical traditions. It includes the development of the messianic idea, Merkava mysticism, Hasidei Ashkenaz, Kabbalah, Sabbatianism, and Hasidism. The current popularity of Kabbalah is also addressed."
RELI 398 "Selected Topics in Religion" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
RELI 400 "Topics in Contemporary Christianity" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. Christianity is a vibrant religious tradition in a state of flux. The encounters, struggles and tensions which Christianity and contemporary cultures are experiencing continue to have a significant impact on our world. This course considers some of those dynamics by focusing on relevant topics from across a variety of Christian denominations and groups."
RELI 401 "Studies in Hebrew Texts" "Prerequisite: HEBR 210, 241, 242; or permission of the Department. A reading of representative selections of classical and modern Hebrew texts. Attention is paid to the historical and philosophical background of the texts."
RELI 402 "Ancient Jewish Biblical Interpretation" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course introduces the major methods, genres, and authors of ancient biblical interpretation together with important recent theoretical approaches to this material. Ancient works considered include later biblical books, rabbinic midrash, and the works of early Jewish and Christian authors, such as Jubilees, the Gospels, and the writings of Philo and Josephus. The course reveals the ways in which this central text was made ever new and relevant and the ways in which it serves as a mirror of the religious diversity of classical to late antiquity."
RELI 404 "Advanced Ancient Judaism" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course introduces, at an advanced level, major topics and scholarly debates in the study of Jewish history and culture in classical and late antiquity, from the Hellenistic period until the Babylonian Talmud (second century BCE to seventh century CE). Special attention is given to the study of ancient textual, epigraphical, and archaeological evidence, together with its contemporary interpretation."
RELI 405 "Food, Sex, and Death in Judaism" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course explores three activities associated with the body  food, sex, and death  as they have been constructed throughout the past 2,000 years of Jewish history. Special attention is given to the cultural contexts in which Jewish practices and attitudes have been shaped, to the relationship between ritual practice and the construction of supernatural worlds, and to the interaction between embodiment and religious experience."
RELI 406 "Feminist Hermeneutics and Scripture" "This course employs critical feminist approaches to sacred texts with a focus on the rediscovery of women within them. Designed for advanced students able to work with primary sources, this course may consider texts such as Hebrew Bible, New Testament, early Jewish and Christian literature, the Quran and Hadith, as well as Hindu and Buddhist writings."
RELI 407 "Topics in Judaic Studies" "This course deals with advanced topics in Judaic Studies. Topics covered change from year to year, and may include Jewish law, Jewish ritual, and Jewish mysticism. Specific topics for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
RELI 409 "Methodology and the Study of Religion" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department.This course examines the various methodological approaches that inform the comparative study of religion. Questions investigated pertain to the collection and interpretation of evidence, the types of resources available and techniques used, the complex differences between mens and womens religious experiences and expressions, as well as the impact of significant theoretical approaches on the analysis of religion."
RELI 410 "Honours Thesis" "Prerequisite: Honours standing in Religions and Cultures or Judaic Studies. The student works with an individual faculty member in a particular field of religious or Judaic studies. Students are asked to produce a sustained piece of written work to be read by their advisor and at least one other member of the Department."
RELI 419 "Approaches to the Quran" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. The course examines selected issues and themes through various works of exegesis or "
RELI 420 "Queer Studies in Religion" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course examines the multiple critical intersections between and among issues of gender, sexuality and religion in different cultures and historical periods. It considers, in particular, the insights provided by queer theory in analyzing and understanding such intersections."
RELI 430 "Hear, See, Taste, Touch: Religion and Material Culture" "This course explores the myriad material forms that make faith tangible for Christians and other persons of faith: images and art, devotional and liturgical objects, architecture and sacred space, and mass-produced projects. It explores the importance of practices that incorporate objects like ritual, prayer, liturgy, instruction, and display. It pays close attention to the scholarly and theological debates that result."
RELI 440 "Greco-Roman Religions" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. This course examines how ancient Greeks and Romans interacted with their gods and other sacred beings. It demonstrates the religious and cultural diversity that marked religious life in the ancient Mediterranean world. Among the topics considered are religion and state, domestic cult, funerary practice, hero devotion, mystery cults, the occult and magic, voluntary associations, and philosophical schools."
RELI 496 "Independent Studies in Religion" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department. The student works with an individual faculty member in a particular field of religious or Judaic studies, as a reading course."
RELI 498 "Advanced Topics in Religion" "Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
SCOL 270 "Historical, Philosophical, and Social Aspects of Science" "Prerequisite: Membership in the Science College, or permission of the College. This course discusses the intellectual framework of science and the relationships between science and society, and the political and philosophical questions inherent in the scientific process. Students are expected to understand the scientific issues at the level at which they were originally addressed."
SCOL 290 "Directed and Independent Study I" "Prerequisite: Membership in the Science College, or permission of the College. The student works under the supervision of a member of the Faculty on either a practical laboratory project or a literature study. A formal, written report is required."
SCOL 350 "Current Issues in Physical, Biological and Mathematical Sciences" "Prerequisite: Membership in the Science College, or permission of the College. This course is designed to help students understand the state of the art in fields of science in which they are not specializing. It discusses problems under current study, and attempts to identify possible future directions of research. The approach is qualitative. Detailed technical knowledge is not prerequisite."
SCOL 360 "Topics for Multidisciplinary Study" "Prerequisite: Membership in the Science College, or permission of the College. The purpose of this course is to introduce students to problems and areas of study which transcend traditional disciplinary barriers. A chosen area of investigation is treated from the viewpoint of various disciplines. Lectures from different areas may be used for this purpose. The aim is to show the contributions made by each field to the understanding of the problem, and how they complement each other."
SCOL 370 "Selected Readings in Multidisciplinary Study " "Prerequisite: Membership in the Science College and/or permission of the College. The purpose of this course is to introduce students to problems and areas of study which transcend traditional disciplinary barriers. A chosen area of investigation is treated from the viewpoint of various disciplines. Readings from different areas may be used for this purpose under guidance of one or more fellows of the College. The aim is to show the contributions made by each field to the understanding of the problem, and how they complement each other."
SCOL 391 "Directed and Independent Study II" "Prerequisite: Membership in the Science College, or permission of the College. A student who has completed SCOL 290 registers for SCOL 391. Students are encouraged to work in a field different from that of their SCOL 290 project."
SCOL 398 "Selected Topics in Multidisciplinary Studies" "Prerequisite: Membership in the Science College and/or permission of the College. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
SCOL 490 "Directed and Independent Study III" "Prerequisite: Membership in the Science College, or permission of the College. A student who has completed SCOL 391 registers for SCOL 490. Students are encouraged to work in a field different from that of their SCOL 290 and 391 projects. Students complete a research project approved in advance by the College, under the supervision of a fellow of the College and/or a faculty member in a scientific discipline at Concordia or elsewhere."
SCPA 201 "Introduction to Public Policy and the Public Interest" "This course introduces students to the theoretical, philosophical, and ethical foundations as well as the social logic of public policy formulation in modern societies. Using a multidisciplinary approach, it pays particular attention to the complex interaction between groups, individuals, and institutions in society, and brings students to consider issues related to the nature of the modern state, business-government relations, the labour movement, non-profit and community organizations, the influence of interest groups, media and international institutions on the policy agenda."
SCPA 203 "Community and Public Affairs in Quebec and Canada" "This course examines the interaction between civil society organizations and the state in the particular context of Quebec and Canada. It focuses on the labour movement, social movements and interest groups, and analyzes their role and influence in the policy-making process in Quebec and Canada, especially with regard to social policy, socio-economic development and human rights."
SCPA 204 "(also listed as POLI 204)" ""
SCPA 205 "(also listed as HIST 205)" " History of Canada, Post-Confederation"
SCPA 210 "(also listed as HIST 210)" " Quebec since Confederation"
SCPA 212 "Introduction to Global Migration: Theories and Issues" "This course explores key concepts and paradigms of immigration, migration and diversity issues confronting nation-states around the globe and examines questions relating to illegal immigration, refugee movements, economic migrants, temporary migration and population displacement due to conflict and environmental issues and the subject of integration."
SCPA 215 "Economics for Public Policy and Community Development" "Based on an overview of current economic issues, this course introduces students to the fundamental analytical tools and concepts that are necessary to understand economic public policy and relevant to community development and empowerment."
SCPA 298 "Selected Topics in Community and Public Affairs" ""
SCPA 299 "Selected Topics in Community and Public Affairs" ""
SCPA 301 "Social Debates and Issues in Public Affairs and Public Policy" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of Stage I. This course emphasizes a deeper understanding of the process by which public policies are developed, implemented, and advocated, and of the role played by various institutions or groups in this process. Each year, a new set of key policy issues is selected for discussion and analysis. Students work in teams and are required to do case studies of institutions or groups relevant to the policy or public affairs issue they have chosen. The focus is on developing both communication skills, through oral and written presentations, and organizational skills as each team must organize one public panel discussion on one of the selected issues. The course takes place over the fall and winter terms."
SCPA 315 "Immigration in Quebec and Canada " "This course focuses on immigration and policies as well as the social consequences of immigration and multiculturalism in Canadian and Quebec contexts. Students learn about the evolution of policy in these areas as well as covering topics such as public opinion and reactions toward immigration, advantages and challenges of multiculturalism vs. integration, and the theoretical debates surrounding immigration and models of integration (assimilation, civic integration, multiculturalism)."
SCPA 321 "Public Affairs Strategies" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of Stage I or permission of the School. This course examines and analyzes the ways in which corporate, public, and community organizations anticipate, monitor, and manage their relations with the social, political, and environmental forces which shape their operations and influence their action in their respective field. It familiarizes students with the strategies most often used in public affairs management, and develops the skills required for effective results."
SCPA 339 "(also listed as POLI 339)" " Quebec Politics and Society/La vie politique qubcoise"
SCPA 352 "Community and Local Activism" "The goal of this course is to share, study, and debate dimensions of community and local activism. It critically examines traditions and histories of a variety of perspectives and presents current examples of local and community activism."
SCPA 398 "Special Area Study in Community and Public Affairs" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of Stage I. Specific topics for this course, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
SCPA 411 "Internship" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of Stages I and II. An essential part of the Schools program is a one-term apprenticeship in some aspect of community and public affairs. After completing 60 credits of the BA program, including Stages I and II, students are required to complete a practicum that will allow them to test their skills in a real situation. Placements may be drawn from all areas of possible employment, including the private sector, government and community service organizations. Students are expected to participate fully in finding and defining possible internships. Employers are asked to join in an evaluation of the work period. Students are required to submit a written report which summarizes and evaluates their work experience."
SCPA 412 "Senior Research Seminar" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of Stages I and II. In this course, students work in groups and are required to play out the position of a given corporate, public, or community organization in a simulation of real-life interaction between social and political actors over a particular policy issue. To this end, they must research and prepare all the necessary material (such as briefs, position papers, press kits) that will allow them to defend and make their policy position known. The actual simulation takes place in a one-day event at the end of the term."
SCPA 450 "Neo-Liberal Globalization and the Global Justice Movement" "This course, by examining global justice movements in the context of neo-liberal globalization, focuses on social movements, public policy and community."
SCPA 480 "Public Affairs Communication" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of Stages I and II. Public affairs communications is the backbone of public policy, politics and advocacy. It is a specialized communication skill set aimed at educating, driving or changing public opinion around a public policy, legislation, political candidates or issues. It includes skills such as understanding and executing public opinion research, political and advocacy campaigns, grassroots and ally development, opinion writing, advocacy advertising, and new media mobilization, among others."
SCPA 481 "Settlement and Integration" "This course examines the experiences of immigrants and refugees in Canada, focusing on the social, cultural and political processes of their integration and/or marginalization. In this context, it explores immigrant-based agencies and social movements, and equitable approaches to settlement services and community development to help newcomers adapt to their new environment. It also looks at integration outcomes of immigrants: employment, education, housing, participation."
SCPA 482 "Field Project in Immigration, Migration and Diversity" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in Certificate in Immigration; SCPA 212, 315. This course is a field project undertaken under the auspices of a non-profit organization working in the domain of immigration. Students in small groups are asked to work on a substantive project and/or program of significance to a community organization. The analysis provided by the students is shared with the organization enabling students to be directly involved and engaged in the field of immigration as practitioners."
SCPA 498 "Special Topics in Community, Public Affairs and Policy Studies" "Prerequisite: Successful completion of Stages I and II. This course provides focused, in-depth examination and analysis of a particular policy topic, public affairs issue, or problem of community development. The subject of inquiry changes every year."
SOCI 212 "Statistics I" "Priority to enrol in this course is given to students who are in a Sociology or Anthropology program. This course provides an introduction to the basic principles of statistics for social scientists. Topics include the concept of the level of measurement, standardization, the interpretation of graphs, measures of univariate distributions, cross classification, elementary measures of association, the logic of controls, and the basic principles of inferential statistics. The emphasis is on the implications of these statistical techniques for theoretical understanding of sociology and anthropology."
SOCI 213 "Statistics II" "Prerequisite: SOCI 212. Priority to enrol in this course is given to students who are in a Sociology or Anthropology program. This course is designed to follow Statistics I. Topics include measures of association, the principles of probability and sampling distributions, hypothesis testing, and tests of significance. The emphasis is on the implications of these statistical techniques for theoretical understanding in sociology and anthropology. This course also introduces students to SPSS (statistical software)."
SOCI 221 "Digital Culture" "This course offers a critical examination of the role of electronic communication, information technology, and the Internet in public culture and the organization of social behaviour and interaction."
SOCI 225 "Sociology Through Film" "The course introduces sociological topics through popular films. Cinema, television, and online videos are selected as examples that can be understood through sociological concepts. Students are provided with a general foundation in sociological thought and interdisciplinary approaches for study at more advanced levels."
SOCI 230 "(also listed as ANTH 230)" " Race and Ethnic Relations"
SOCI 244 "Sociology of Leisure" "The course examines the effects of social, economic, and political institutions upon the structure and use of leisure time. The emphasis is upon historical changes and the implications of alienation, anomie, and inequality."
SOCI 250 "Sociology of Culture" "This course provides an introduction to theory and research on the sociology of culture, the organization and dynamics of cultural systems, cultural production and consumption, subcultures, mass culture, popular culture, and strategies of interpretive analysis for the study of culture."
SOCI 252 "(also listed as ANTH 252)" " Food and Culture"
SOCI 261 "Social Problems" "Students examine a range of social problems related to aging, health, poverty, population growth, crowding, crime and justice, gender and gender orientation, inequality, media, non-medical drug use, suicide, globalization, and race, ethnicity, and language issues. Attention is focused on the process by which social problems are defined and recognized, and social policies developed and modified."
SOCI 262 "Social Deviance" "This course focuses on the ways in which deviance and normalcy are socially constructed. It examines how deviance is related to social norms and how norms come into being. Deviance is viewed as a social process of interaction and relation that derives from the social structure and has consequences for it. Various forms of deviance are also considered in terms of contemporary social theory and research."
SOCI 263 "Youth Crime and Deviance" "This course examines the nature of youth crime and youth deviance and their social causes and consequences. Youth crime, as a special kind of deviance, receives the focus of attention, with emphasis on youth criminal justice and the social control of youth deviance generally."
SOCI 264 "Sociology of Sport" "This course provides a systematic analysis of the social influences upon sport in North America. Special attention is directed to the interrelationships between sport and various social institutions."
SOCI 274 "The Sociology of Aging" "This course examines the changes in society and in living conditions as populations and people age. The sources and the effects of these changes are looked at in the light of several substantive areas and in terms of their implications for social policy. While the major emphasis is on the Canadian experience, some comparative materials are used to widen the perspective."
SOCI 275 "Self and Society" "This course studies the basic concepts and theories regarding social definitions of the Self. Emphasis is placed on ideas regarding personality, motivation, and interpersonal attitudes, viewed in terms of the interplay between actors and social structures."
SOCI 277 "(also listed as ANTH 277)" " Contemporary Issues in Economy, Society, and Biodiversity"
SOCI 280 "Debates and Challenges in Contemporary Quebec Society /" " La Socit qubcoise : dfis et enjeux"
SOCI 282 "Canadian Society" "Analysis of Canadian social structure and change; the relation of the whole of Canadian society to its constituent elements; the relation of Canadian society to its international environment."
SOCI 285 "(also listed as ANTH 285/HIST 285/POLI 285)" ""
SOCI 290 "(also listed as SSDB 270/FFAR 290)" " HIV/AIDS: Cultural, Social and Scientific Aspects of the Pandemic"
SOCI 298 "Selected Topics in Sociology" ""
SOCI 299 "Selected Topics in Sociology" "Specific topics for these courses, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule and the Departmental Handbook."
SOCI 300 "Classical Social Theory" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course involves an examination of the origins of sociology and of the sociological works of 19th- and early-20th-century European theorists, with consideration of the social and political context. Particular emphasis is given to the works of Durkheim, Marx, and Weber. Readings include primary sources and critical commentaries."
SOCI 303 "(also listed as ANTH 303)" ""
SOCI 310 "Research Methods" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1); SOCI 212. This course introduces students to the concepts, language, and techniques of quantitative and qualitative research methods. It familiarizes students with the initiation of research problems, the gathering of accurate data, their analysis and the interpretation and reporting of research findings. This course also introduces students to library research."
SOCI 319 "(also listed as ANTH 319)" " Socio-Environmental Issues"
SOCI 321 "Sociology of Health, Illness and Medicine " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines health, illness and medicine as socio-cultural, rather than strictly biomedical, phenomena. Topics may include the sick role; stigma; the experience of illness; the concept of disease and disease classification; the politics of disease; medicalization of gender, race, and disability; and the Canadian health-care system, including Big Pharma and Complementary and Alternative Medicine."
SOCI 322 "(also listed as ANTH 322)" ""
SOCI 323 "Economic Transformations in Capitalist Society" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course maps the emergence of capitalist society and its transformations over the 20th century, and also explores a number of its contemporary dynamics. The course takes a panoramic and integrated approach to the analysis of capitalist society, demonstrating the deep interconnectedness of what is referred to as the economy to all aspects of social life."
SOCI 325 "Social Change" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the sources, mechanisms, and consequences of social and cultural change. Classical and contemporary theories of change are analyzed, as well as significant empirical studies."
SOCI 329 "Sexual Labour and Society" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). Sociologists have studied sexual labour in a variety of ways: as a form of deviant behaviour, as a particular type of gender relation, and as a distinct occupational sector. This course explores the sociology of sexual labour; the historical and legal contexts of sex industries; health and safety; media representations; online interactions; the emergence of sex worker organizations; and the intersections of private belief, public morality, consumer capitalism and the organization of justice. In addition to providing an overview of theoretical and methodological paradigms, the course is grounded in a comparative perspective that critically examines a variety of current events."
SOCI 331 "Social Inequalities" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the dynamics of social stratification and differentiation, including economic distinctions and their consequences, social status, power, and mobility. Emphasis is placed upon Canadian society."
SOCI 333 "Political Sociology" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course is concerned with the nature, organization, distribution, determinants, and consequences of power in social systems."
SOCI 336 "Collective Action" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course is concerned with the nature, emergence, and dynamics of short-term collective action. Classical collective behaviour theories and contemporary interpretations of collective action are examined."
SOCI 338 "Sociology of Religion" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course presents an overview of the role of religion in society as found in the pertinent literature of sociology and anthropology. Special consideration is given to the relationship between religion and other social institutions, with particular attention to changes in the religious structures and practices in modern pluralistic societies."
SOCI 341 "Sociology of the Media" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course provides an introduction to sociological debates on the relevance and impact of mass media in our society. With a focus on North American media, this course takes a historical perspective to explore the rise of the mass media and the transformation of its relation with culture, especially popular culture. Particular attention is given to themes such as media and identity, national identity; media structures and ownership concentration; media texts and audiences."
SOCI 342 "Sociology of Occupations" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the role played by occupations and the world of work in industrialized societies. Economic, social, psychological, and moral attributes of occupations are examined in relation to changing markets for labour. Specific problem areas to be covered include changes in the structure of professions, the effects of changing technology and organizational design on occupational requirements, issues in work and household demands, issues in employment equity and problems of unemployment."
SOCI 343 "(also listed as ANTH 343)" " Media Ethnographies"
SOCI 345 "(also listed as ANTH 345)" " Movement and Travel"
SOCI 347 "Sociology of Labour-Management Relations" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course involves the study of the shifting patterns in labour-management relations with a special focus on Canada. The course includes analyses of theories of management; the impact of the labour union movement, changes in the nature of the labour market; the significance of the growth of the service sector; the changing role of governments in labour-related issues; and contemporary thought on new forms of industrial organization."
SOCI 349 "(also listed as ANTH 349)" " Youth: Anthropological and Sociological Perspectives"
SOCI 352 "(also listed as ANTH 352)" ""
SOCI 353 "(also listed as ANTH 353)" " Questioning Community"
SOCI 355 "(also listed as ANTH 355)" " Urban Regions"
SOCI 358 "Population Challenges of the 21st Century" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course provides an introduction to the basic principles, data, and methods of population studies through an examination of current issues such as the aging of the population; the sex imbalance in some countries; immigration and globalization; the future of the world population; cohabitation and the growing diversity of families. Social factors and the consequences for our societies of these demographic challenges are discussed."
SOCI 362 "Crime and Justice" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course provides a critical analysis of the Canadian criminal justice system. The focus is on the process by which the accused is judged guilty or innocent, sentenced, punished or corrected, and the treatment of the victim."
SOCI 363 "(also listed as ANTH 363)" " Law and Society"
SOCI 366 "The History and Sociology of Genocide to 1945" ""
SOCI 367 "The History and Sociology of Genocide from 1945 to the Present" ""
SOCI 375 "(also listed as ANTH 375)" " Social Construction of Sexualities"
SOCI 376 "Socialization" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the social and cultural processes by which the individual becomes a functioning member of society. Attention is given to adult socialization and re-socialization in diverse institutional contexts such as schools, occupations, hospitals, prisons, the military. The relationship of social structure to role acquisition and role performance is a major focus of the course."
SOCI 378 "(also listed as ANTH 378)" ""
SOCI 380 "(also listed as ANTH 380)" ""
SOCI 381 "(also listed as ANTH 381)" " Ethnic Communities in Canada"
SOCI 383 "Consumer Society" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course considers the historical emergence of consumerism in advanced industrial economies and continues to examine the developing characteristics of consumer societies in the present. Topics include the role of consumer goods in mediating social status and personal or collective identities, the relationship of consumerism to present ecological concerns, and the role of advertising and promotional discourse in the creation of new habits and expectations in everyday life."
SOCI 384 "(also listed as ANTH 384)" " Food and Sustainability"
SOCI 398 "Selected Topics in Sociology" ""
SOCI 399 "Selected Topics in Sociology" ""
SOCI 402 "Contemporary Sociological Theory" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2); SOCI 300. This course examines contemporary sociological theory. It focuses on how sociologists synthesize concepts from different sociological schools and disciplines (interactionism, phenomenology, functionalism, conflict theory, critical theory, political and moral philosophy) into general theories that seek to explain how social action, structure, the self, symbolic order, communication, technology, and social division are produced and reproduced in modern and postmodern societies."
SOCI 403 "Contemporary Cultural Theory" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2); SOCI 300. This course examines a variety of approaches and area studies (poststructuralism, deconstruction, postcolonialist and cultural studies). It looks at how they shift contemporary sociological theory toward a focus on relations between discourse, knowledge, and power, and toward a critical reflection on cultural systems and institutions. The emphasis is on theories that seek to explain and understand the emergence of cultural politics in modern and postmodern societies."
SOCI 404 "Sociology of Literature" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines literature as a social practice and cultural artifact that is embedded in and shapes the emotional orientations, beliefs, behaviours, power relations, and material reality of readers. Issues may include the active role of readers in the production of texts meanings and emotional effects, the social forces involved in the appeal or condemnation of popular genres and in the banning or canonization of specific works, the development of literary fiction as a field, and the rise of the novel as a modern literary form."
SOCI 406 "Sociology of Knowledge" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines a variety of theories of the relation of knowledge and belief to social contexts."
SOCI 409 "Honours Seminar" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2); SOCI 410 or 415 previously or concurrently; and permission of the honours advisor. This course involves the student formulating an honours research proposal, and the research and writing of an honours paper."
SOCI 410 "Research Design and Analysis" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2); SOCI 310. This course looks at quantitative methods of data collection and analysis. Topics include experimental and quasi-experimental design, principles of measurement, survey design, secondary data sources, techniques of multivariate analysis, and interpretation."
SOCI 415 "Field Research" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2); SOCI 310. This course provides the opportunity for advanced qualitative research methods. Students are taught systematic procedures for the collection of primary data using methods that include participant-observation and formal and informal interviewing, survey research, and library research."
SOCI 421 "Sociology of Emotions" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course explores the dynamic relationship between social and emotional life. Emotional experience is understood to emerge through interaction, to orient social action, and to form the basis of social order and social change. Topics may include forms of suffering and well-being, health and illness, personal appearance, social movements, self-help, consumption, identity, popular culture, and campaigns of fear and desire."
SOCI 424 "Applied Social Statistics" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2); successful completion of SOCI 213 and 310. This course explores statistical tools and techniques commonly used in sociological research, and provides an opportunity to work with large databases. The sessions are designed in an applied manner with weekly hands-on applications and/or case studies using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) program."
SOCI 428 "Capitalism and Crisis" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course offers an advanced study of the contemporary dimensions of capitalist society from an approach known as political economy, emphasizing the interconnectedness of those areas of social life that are conventionally differentiated as the economy, politics and culture. The course focuses on the dynamics of "
SOCI 430 "(also listed as ANTH 430)" ""
SOCI 433 "(also listed as ANTH 433)" ""
SOCI 434 "Sociology of Suicide" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course reviews the important body of literature on suicide since Durkheims foundational study, with a particular focus on the sociological writings. The course also provides an overview of the key features of contemporary suicide in Canada, including the emergence of youth suicide and suicide among First Peoples."
SOCI 437 "Social Movements" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). The nature, emergence, and dynamics of organized collective behaviour and social movements are examined in light of classical and contemporary theories. The course focuses on the impact of leadership, organizational resources, and discontent with institutionalized social relations on social movements. Contemporary social movements in Quebec, the rest of Canada, and the U.S. serve as illustrations."
SOCI 441 "(also listed as ANTH 441)" ""
SOCI 445 "Sociology of Labour Movements" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course analyzes the origins and development of labour movements as well as contemporary characteristics of union organizations within the context of their social, political, and economic environments. Emphasis is placed on Canada and Quebec."
SOCI 449 "(also listed as ANTH 449)" " The Culture of Touch"
SOCI 450 "(also listed as ANTH 450)" " Social Economy and Sustainable Futures"
SOCI 451 "Citizenship, Eros and the City" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course invites students to explore the relation between classic and contemporary texts in the field of social and political thought. The three interrelated areas of study include Citizenship, Eros and the City. The course explores diverse theories of democracy, community, love, and civil society. The integrating theme for these three areas is public and private relationships in the city."
SOCI 453 "Media Sociology and Journalism" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course invites students to participate in developing a media sociology that situates journalism in broad social-historical contexts. In addition to an introduction to media sociologies, the course explores current changes in journalism practices and the impact of digital culture on information, news and public life."
SOCI 460 "Sociology of Fear and Risk" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course explores the subjective, moral, cultural, and embodied dimensions of the individual experience and social production of fear. It considers the role of fear in processes of social ordering and change, emotional socialization, and emotion management. Risk is examined as a dominant form of fear structured by the contemporary relationship to danger and security in Western societies."
SOCI 462 "(also listed as ANTH 462)" " The New Imperialism"
SOCI 474 "(also listed as ANTH 474)" ""
SOCI 475 "(also listed as ANTH 475)" ""
SOCI 476 "Feminist Sociological Theories" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). Analysis of recent debates and perspectives within feminist social theory, in particular the concepts of gender, equality, difference, identity, and power; feminist dialogues with, and critiques of, sociological theory."
SOCI 483 "(also listed as ANTH 483)" " Nationalism and Racism"
SOCI 484 "(also listed as ANTH 484)" " Surveillance Studies"
SOCI 498 "Advanced Topics in Sociology" ""
SOCI 499 "Advanced Topics in Sociology" ""
ANTH 203 "Culture and Biology" "This course focuses on the interrelationship between culture and human biology. The course examines current debates about evolutionary theory, human origins, the dispersal of the human species, and human adaptations occurring with agriculture in the Holocene and industrialization in the Anthropocene. In addition, issues of human variation and cultural adaptation allow a critical examination of how biology makes culture possible and how culture influences the direction of biological evolution."
ANTH 204 "Native Peoples of North America" "Focusing primarily on the Native peoples of Canada, this course examines the ecological, economic, social, and religious aspects of Native cultures. A representative society from each geographic area of Canada is studied. This course is primarily ethnographic in emphasis, but it also seeks to provide some of the social and historical background necessary to understand the current situation of Native communities."
ANTH 212 "Elements of Ethno-Linguistics" "This is an introductory course which explores the relationship between language and culture, and the use of language in society. Major issues and debates in linguistic anthropology and in the sociology of language are examined."
ANTH 221 "Symbolic Anthropology" "This course examines alternative theoretical approaches to the study of the role of symbols in society. The course is devoted to a consideration of the contributions of structural, psychoanalytic, and interpretive anthropology."
ANTH 230 "(also listed as SOCI 230)" " Race and Ethnic Relations"
ANTH 231 "Culture and Commerce" "This course explores the influence of cultural values on the organization of the production, distribution or marketing, and the consumption of goods and services at both the local and global levels of the world economy. It also examines the social and environmental impact of the globalization of the consumer society."
ANTH 252 "(also listed as SOCI 252)" " Food and Culture "
ANTH 255 "The Caribbean: History and Political Economy" "As an introduction to the social and cultural history of the Caribbean, primarily since 1492, this course focuses on the diverse cultures of the region, the development and legacy of the political economy of plantation society, as well as empire and globalization, resistance and rebellion, decolonization, cultural creolization and the broad struggle for Caribbean freedom."
ANTH 270 "Anthropology and Contemporary Issues" "This course examines contemporary world issues from a cross-cultural perspective. Discussion ranges from a critical examination of anthropological concepts and methods to a consideration of some of the practical or applied uses of anthropology. Specific topics include the consequences of underdevelopment, modernization, and the place of folk cultures and tradition in an increasingly global society."
ANTH 272 "Comparative Culture" "This course is a general introduction to social and cultural anthropology. It examines the ways in which anthropologists use the comparative method to understand cultures in their unity and diversity. The focus is upon reading ethnographies."
ANTH 276 "(also listed as SOCI 276)" " Gender and Society"
ANTH 277 "(also listed as SOCI 277)" " Contemporary Issues in Economy, Society, and Biodiversity"
ANTH 285 "(also listed as HIST 285/POLI 285/SOCI 285)" ""
ANTH 298 "Selected Topics in Anthropology" ""
ANTH 299 "Selected Topics in Anthropology" ""
ANTH 301 "History of Anthropological Thought" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course provides students with a historical overview of anthropological theory. Through the study of original theoretical and ethnographic texts, students engage with the interplay between theory and ethnography and recognize the continued relevance of canonical debates to the contemporary discipline."
ANTH 302 "Art, Aesthetics, and Anthropology" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the relationship between art and society. It is mainly concerned with analyzing how art may function as a means of signifying and perpetuating a given social order. Examples of artistic practice are drawn from diverse North and South American, African, and Melanesian cultures."
ANTH 303 "(also listed as SOCI 303)" ""
ANTH 305 "Culture and History" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course analyzes some of the ways history has been understood both in our own and other cultures, including history as legitimating charter, as repeating cycle, as a scientific inquiry, as a series of unique events, and as a basis for ethical judgments."
ANTH 307 "Understanding Myths" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course presents a survey of current anthropological theories of the nature and function of myths. The course also analyzes competing interpretations of some classic Western myths, and concludes with an examination of mythmaking in contemporary Western culture."
ANTH 315 "Field Research" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course provides the opportunity to study and practise qualitative research methods as they are used by anthropologists. Students learn systematic procedures for the collection of primary data using methods that include participant-observation and formal and informal interviewing."
ANTH 319 "(also listed as SOCI 319)" " Socio-Environmental Issues"
ANTH 322 "(also listed as SOCI 322)" ""
ANTH 324 "Peoples and Cultures of the Pacific Islands" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course presents an overview of the peoples and cultures of the Pacific Islands, with particular emphasis on Melanesia. In addition to studying the peopling of the Pacific, the course delves into a range of classic anthropological topics, and addresses contemporary issues of gender, migration, and urbanization."
ANTH 325 "Magic, Science, Religion, and Ideology" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course analyzes belief systems and their attendant rituals and practices. The focus is on how anthropologists differentiate between magic, science, religion, and ideology, and how anthropologists understand the relationship between belief systems and reality."
ANTH 326 "Peoples and Cultures of Sub-Saharan Africa" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). The course gives a broad historical and geographical survey of the region, and discusses, through case studies, older and contemporary topics, debates, and issues of African anthropology."
ANTH 332 "Health, Illness and Healing in Cross-Cultural Perspective" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course explores beliefs and practices surrounding illness and healing across various cultures. A range of issues is examined, including, for example, social and cultural constructions of the body, disease causation, ethnomedicine, healing efficacy, biomedical technology, ethics, medical pluralism, global health, and the impact of a globalized medical/pharmaceutical industry. The course involves engagement with both theoretical and practical questions."
ANTH 343 "(also listed as SOCI 343)" " Media Ethnographies"
ANTH 345 "(also listed as SOCI 345)" " Movement and Travel"
ANTH 349 "(also listed as SOCI 349)" " Youth: Anthropological and Sociological Perspectives"
ANTH 352 "(also listed as SOCI 352)" ""
ANTH 353 "(also listed as SOCI 353)" " Questioning Community"
ANTH 355 "(also listed as SOCI 355)" " Urban Regions"
ANTH 361 "Kinship and Relatedness" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course examines the changing significance of kinship in anthropology as well as in peoples lives and covers classic and contemporary approaches to kinship through ethnographic examples from across the world. Topics discussed may include descent, incest, sex and marriage; feminist and queer critiques; and the influence of globalization, new media and reproductive technologies on relatedness."
ANTH 363 "(also listed as SOCI 363)" " Law and Society"
ANTH 375 "(also listed as SOCI 375)" " Social Construction of Sexualities"
ANTH 377 "Visual Anthropology" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). In looking at the history of ethnographers visual documentation of non-Western peoples as well as indigenous self-representations, this course primarily concerns itself with power and the development of professional anthropology, focusing on photography and film. It explores paradigms and case studies in the history of visual anthropology by highlighting the stylistic, social scientific, commercial, and political agendas that influence the production of visual documents. Starting with colonial exhibitions of exotic natives, the course progresses to classic and contemporary ethnographic film with a focus on Curtis, Flaherty, Mead, Gardner, Rouch, and MacDougall."
ANTH 378 "(also listed as SOCI 378)" ""
ANTH 379 "Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Gender" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). The course explores through different theoretical perspectives and ethnographic examples, cross-cultural differences in sex/gender systems. A comparative analysis of gender relations in band, tribal, and state societies is undertaken. Topics discussed include the sexual division of labour, the cultural and social construction of gender, and the impact of economic development."
ANTH 380 "(also listed as SOCI 380)" ""
ANTH 381 "(also listed as SOCI 381)" " Ethnic Communities in Canada"
ANTH 384 "(also listed as SOCI 384)" " Food and Sustainability"
ANTH 385 "Globalization and Transnationality" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). Globalization has been used generally to denote the increasingly rapid and far-flung circulation of people, money, commodities, and images around the world. This course introduces students to a sample of issues covered by anthropologists and sociologists in respect to this process, while at the same time also exploring transnational social networks that cross state borders but are not necessarily global in scope."
ANTH 398 "Selected Topics in Anthropology" ""
ANTH 399 "Selected Topics in Anthropology" ""
ANTH 420 "Psychological Anthropology" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines and critiques the theoretical concepts of Western academic and folk psychology from the perspective of the psychologies of other cultures. Topics considered include the cultural construction of the emotions, personality development, perception, culture-bound psychiatric syndromes (such as windigo psychosis, amok), and altered states of consciousness, and indigenous theories of dream interpretation."
ANTH 423 "Political Anthropology" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines the political process and political organization in cross-cultural perspective. The focus is on how order is achieved in the absence of the state, as well as questions of leadership, power, and authority in different social contexts."
ANTH 424 "Experiments and Experience in Ethnographic Writing" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines debates that stemmed from the postmodern critique of representation in anthropology in the mid-1980s. This critique has highlighted new politics for the writing of ethnographic texts, as well as raised a number of epistemological questions relating to the ontological status of truth. The course focuses on recent experiments in ethnographic writing and on dynamics of fieldwork experience."
ANTH 425 "Religions in the 21st Century" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines the contemporary roles of religion as systems of meaning, a focus of social claims, and as elements of self-expression. This discussion is set within the historical trajectories of instances of globalization, such as colonization and the spread of world religions, conversions to Christianity and liberation theories, the politicization of Islam, or the emergence of New Age religions as new forms of identity."
ANTH 427 "Thinking Beyond Humans" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course begins with the premise that in order to fully understand the impact that people have had on the world around us, it is necessary to start by seriously questioning the idea of the human. The course is an opportunity to explore emerging themes in anthropological research, from environmental studies to cybernetics alongside key works of philosophy, literature and social science in the post-humanist tradition."
ANTH 430 "(also listed as SOCI 430)" ""
ANTH 431 "Neo-Marxism and Cultures" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course analyzes the relationships between economy and cultural systems. The first section is devoted to the concept of economic base and superstructure in the industrial world; the second section focuses on selected case studies of non-industrial cultures and industrial cultures. The course concludes with an appraisal of the quality of economic life in non-industrial cultures."
ANTH 433 "(also listed as SOCI 433)" ""
ANTH 440 "Culture, Language, and Mind" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2); ANTH 212. This course looks at the relationship between linguistics and anthropology, and examines some of the issues in the linkage between language, culture, and thought."
ANTH 441 "(also listed as SOCI 441)" ""
ANTH 444 "International Indigenism" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course reviews, examines and critically assesses the international indigenous peoples movement and the articulation of indigenous identities, rights, communities and politics from a global perspective."
ANTH 449 "(also listed as SOCI 449)" " The Culture of Touch"
ANTH 450 "(also listed as SOCI 450)" " Social Economy and Sustainable Futures"
ANTH 462 "(also listed as SOCI 462)" " The New Imperialism"
ANTH 463 "Current Debates in Kinship" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). From its inception, the anthropological investigation of kinship has been centred around organization and regulation of so-called biological facts such as procreation and genetic relatedness or consanguinity. The course examines how international adoption, new reproductive technologies, and gay and lesbian kinship reshape the way people think about kinship."
ANTH 465 "Legal Anthropology" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course analyzes the legal system as an institutionalized system of social control and meanings, using historical and comparative data. Special attention is given to the study of the interface of law and other areas of sociological inquiry, including social change, conflict, and decision-making."
ANTH 471 "Food and Social Change" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This advanced course explores the links between socio-cultural change and changes in food patterns, practices and ideologies, from theoretical and ethnographic perspectives. Topics may include the relationships of food changes to technology, migration, everyday life, taste, ethics and globalization."
ANTH 472 "Childhood and Youth" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course examines the increasingly diverse field of anthropological research on children and youths. This field of interest has recently been expanded to consider a wide range of arenas in which children and youth may be implicated across the world, such as consumption, mobility, media, work, and conflict."
ANTH 474 "(also listed as SOCI 474)" ""
ANTH 475 "(also listed as SOCI 475)" ""
ANTH 477 "Elites, Privilege and Relative Advantage" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course reviews the analytical and comparative challenges posed by the study of the elites such as scientists, entrepreneurs, and politicians. More modest forms of relative advantage and privilege are also addressed."
ANTH 479 "Feminism and Anthropology" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This course explores the dialogue between feminist theory and anthropology. Topics discussed include feminist standpoint theory and the critique of objectivity in feminist philosophy of science; feminist contributions to the historical development of anthropological theory; and the relationship between feminism and postmodernism in current debates on ethnography and fieldwork."
ANTH 483 "(also listed as SOCI 483)" " Nationalism and Racism"
ANTH 484 "(also listed as SOCI 484)" " Surveillance Studies"
ANTH 495 "Honours Essay" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2); ANTH 315; and permission of the honours advisor. Under the supervision of an Anthropology staff member, the student prepares an honours essay on a subject chosen in consultation with and approved by the professor."
ANTH 498 "Advanced Topics in Anthropology" ""
ANTH 499 "Advanced Topics in Anthropology" ""
SSDB 220 "Introduction to Theories of Sexuality" "This course is a multidisciplinary introduction to the central problems in the study of sexuality. The development over the last century of such key concepts as gender, identity, sex role, sexual orientation, sexual liberation, heterosexuality, and feminist, queer, and intersectional theory are examined. The course surveys theories of sexuality as they are conceived in scientific and cultural discourses with attention to areas of overlap and difference."
SSDB 270 "(also listed as FFAR 290/SOCI 290) " " HIV/AIDS: Cultural, Social and Scientific Aspects of the Pandemic"
SSDB 275 "(also listed as FASS 291) " " Introduction to Sexuality Research"
SSDB 390 "Sexuality Theory Before Stonewall" "Prerequisite: 30 university credits; SSDB 220 or SSDB 275; or permission of the Institute. An historical study of theories of sexuality before the 1969 Stonewall riots and recent feminist and intersectional analysis of sexuality, this course may include selections from among the following: Lucretius, Plato, Augustine, Shakespeare, Locke, Sade, Darwin, Freud, Kraft-Ebing, Hirschfeld, Lvi-Strauss, De Beauvoir, Mead, and Kinsey."
SSDB 426 "Practicum" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits; enrolment in the Major in Interdisciplinary Studies in Sexuality; and permission of the Institute. This course offers a 100-hour field experience over the course of one semester. The course involves a fieldwork project undertaken under the supervision of a member of the Program Consultation Committee in Interdisciplinary Studies in Sexuality."
SSDB 428 "Independent Study" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits; enrolment in the Major or Minor in Interdisciplinary Studies in Sexuality; and permission of the Institute. This course provides the opportunity for an independent study in which the student may explore, from a feminist and intersectional perspective, a specific topic within the interdisciplinary field of sexuality."
SSDB 492 "Seminar in Advanced Topics in Sexuality I" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits; enrolment in the Major or Minor in Interdisciplinary Studies in Sexuality, or permission of the Institute. This seminar is designed to provide a setting for concentrated learning and an opportunity for advanced feminist and intersectional study on a research topic in sexuality."
SSDB 493 "Seminar in Advanced Topics in Sexuality II" "Prerequisite: 60 university credits; enrolment in the Major or Minor in Interdisciplinary Studies in Sexuality, or permission of the Institute. This seminar is designed to provide a setting for concentrated learning and an opportunity for advanced feminist and intersectional study on a research topic in sexuality."
WSDB 291 "Introduction to Contemporary Concerns in Womens Studies" "This course explores a range of current issues and debates within feminism. Using interdisciplinary feminist theories that consider how systems of power such as patriarchy, capitalism, racism, and heterosexism constitute one another, it examines particular local and global topics of interest/concern which may include health, education, work, violence against women, globalization, militarism, media and cultural representations, families, and feminist activism."
WSDB 292 "Feminisms and Research Methods" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Womens Studies program or permission of the Institute. This course exposes students to a variety of research practices from a feminist perspective. These practices can include oral history, interviews, archival research, and participant observation. Students learn how to gather, analyze, and effectively present ideas and information. Practical, hands-on exercises offer an opportunity for learning. Examination of research methods occurs in dialogue with questions of how knowledge is organized. Students are also exposed to recent developments in information literacy. This course prepares students to conduct their own research projects throughout their studies."
WSDB 298 "Selected Topics in Womens Studies" "Specific topics for these courses, and prerequisites relevant in each case, are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
WSDB 310 "Feminism, Comedy, and Social Change" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). In this course, students examine the complex relationship between feminism and comedy through an interdisciplinary framework. The course posits comedic performance as a social/cultural text and considers how comedy might be used to challenge inequalities and promote social change. Topics may include the production and consumption of various genres of comedy; different theories of humour; the connections between comedic performances and key feminist principles; and how social and political issues can be addressed through comedy."
WSDB 365 "Feminist Theory and Popular Culture" "This course examines how feminism has not only commented on the world of pop culture but has entered and altered it. Through a study of television, film, advertising, pop music, cyber culture, and kiddie culture, students look at the ways in which popular culture has impacted how women view themselves and how they are viewed."
WSDB 370 "Workshops in Special Areas of Womens Studies" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). The purpose of these workshops is to examine a number of issues relevant to Womens Studies. Specific topics for this course are stated in the Undergraduate Class Schedule."
WSDB 380 "Feminist Thought I" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course introduces students to the main aspects of feminist thought across the disciplines. Through a selection of readings and case studies, feminist thought is examined in two interrelated senses: the exercise of woman-centred inquiry, and feminism as a critique of existing knowledge frameworks. Students are introduced to fundamental feminist notions such as the distinction between the private and the public, the notion of experience, androcentrism, and the division between the family and the economy. The history of feminist thought is explored as well as its articulation since the 1970s and its contribution to Womens Studies and to social theory in general. Also examined is the potential and power of different feminist theories to effect social change and transform the social world they analyze."
WSDB 381 "Indigenous Women and Feminisms" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course aims to acquaint students with the concerns and contemporary realities of Indigenous women in North America. It examines Indigenous politics, activism, and culture through current feminist, decolonizing and post-colonial lenses. The course examines issues such as identity, representation, citizenship, land, sovereignty, nationalism, sexual and social violence, and de/re/colonization. Students develop critical thinking skills necessary to explore how sexism and racism are encoded in Canadian institutions and laws, how Indigenous women have engaged with the resulting disenfranchisement, and how they have been leading actors in Indigenous struggles, making significant contributions to their communities and nations."
WSDB 383 "Lesbian Issues and Realities" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course introduces the field of lesbian studies and examines lesbian existence from a political and empirical perspective. The course engages diverse feminist perspectives on gender, nation, race, class, culture, ability and sexual identity in the lives and political consciousness of lesbians. Attention is paid to Canadian and Quebec contexts."
WSDB 384 "Queer Feminism" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course introduces the critical and discursive legacies of queer feminism, engaging with a host of identities, bodies, practices and pleasures. The course interrogates the ways in which gender and sexuality intersect with nation, race, class, culture and ability from the point of view of political action and cultural production. Attention is paid to Canadian and Quebec contexts."
WSDB 385 "Introduction to Trans Studies" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). The first part of the course reviews the emergence of Trans Studies: what came before it and what distinguished it from other forms of knowledge about trans people. Also reviewed is Trans Studies theoretical and methodological heritage, including the ways in which Feminism and Queer Theory have shaped the fields interests. The second part of the course evaluates Trans Studies in action by looking at selected aspects of some trans peoples lives: their history, community building, access to health care and social services, criminalization, and self-narration."
WSDB 386 "Framing the Prostitute" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1): The problem of prostitution  specifically the public/visible presence of women providing sexual services to men for money  has long preoccupied Western society. This course explores the frames superimposed on prostitution, regardless of the cultural, religious, scientific, geographic or political context in which it exists."
WSDB 390 "Feminist Perspectives on Peace" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). Using feminist scholarship, this course covers themes such as militarism, the war industry, women in the military, war mythologies, organized and domestic violence, roles played by women during wars, wars against women, peace education and feminist peace activism."
WSDB 391 "Health Issues: Feminist Perspectives" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course presents feminist, intersectional, postcolonialist, poststructuralist and queer examinations of a variety of womens health issues. It explores the complex cultural politics that tend to legitimize existing power relations in health care, health research, and health industries. Topics include biopolitics and surveillance of womens bodies, medicalization and disease mongering, patriarchal capitalism and the health industry, cosmetic surgery and oppression or agency, womens health and sociocultural identifications, feminist medical ethics, and alternative and feminist health care."
WSDB 392 "Fminismes dans la francophonie" "Pralable: Voir N.B. numro (1). A partir de textes thoriques et douvrages traitant de la vie quotidienne, ce cours examine les similitudes, les analogies et les traits distinctifs des luttes des femmes durant les deux dernires dcennies, ici et ailleurs dans la francophonie, notamment les luttes des Arabes, des Antillaises ou des femmes dAfrique noire."
WSDB 393 "Critical Race Feminisms " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (1). This course explores the concepts of race, racism, and racialization, alongside feminist theories and practices. Drawing from feminist and critical race theories, the course focuses on questions of power, knowledge production, and interlocking systems of oppression within local and global contemporary contexts. It provides opportunities to reflect upon anti-racist feminist practice and to apply anti-racist analyses."
WSDB 394 "Tutorial in Womens Studies " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Womens Studies program; 24 university credits including WSDB 290, 291, 292 and 380; and permission of the Institute. In addition, students must have a minimum GPA of 3.0 (B) and a demonstrated ability to carry out independent research. Tutorials are given only in exceptional circumstances and should focus on a topic not covered under the normal curriculum. A Tutorial Request form must be completed by the student and then approved by a full-time Simone de Beauvoir Institute faculty member acting as a supervisor."
WSDB 398 "Selected Topics in Womens Studies" ""
WSDB 399 "Selected Topics in Womens Studies" ""
WSDB 410 "Feminisms, Tourism, and Mobilities" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This advanced-level seminar explores gender, race, citizenship, class and sexuality as they manifest in various forms of contemporary tourism. This course, primarily concerned with issues of power, explores an interdisciplinary theoretical framework that privileges feminist transnational/postcolonial and critical race approaches. Some of the issues explored through this course include who can freely, safely and easily cross borders as well as the impacts of tourist consumption. Other themes may include the marketing and commodification of destinations and the interpersonal social encounters that tourism and travel enable."
WSDB 480 "Feminist Thought II" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). While "
WSDB 490 "Feminist Ethics" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This interdisciplinary seminar considers the effect of systems of gender, race, and class on womens place in society. It takes into account recent developments in feminist scholarship in the humanities and social sciences."
WSDB 491 "Feminist Perspectives on Culture" "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). This seminar explores the central concepts and theories in feminist cultural studies, as they inform feminist, post-colonial, queer, and post-structuralist understandings of culture. The focus is on women as cultural producers and subjects in/of various cultural texts (e.g. cinema, visual arts, music, advertising, popular media, feminist writings). The discursive construction of gender, as it is inflected by class, race, sexuality, and location, is examined as well as the ways in which it is used, displayed, imagined and performed in contemporary culture. Students develop practical and analytical skills, posing questions of how particular cultural narratives function within social, political and economic contexts. Students are required to participate in and lead discussions of the readings and to create and/or critique cultural productions."
WSDB 492 "Post-colonial and Anti-colonial Feminist Theories and Practice " "Prerequisite: See N.B. number (2). The course is devoted to understanding the gendered dimensions of colonial/imperial relations of power and resistance both in historical and contemporary contexts. The main themes covered in the course include settler colonialism in Canada; knowledge, representations and power; contemporary challenges and resistance to anti-imperialist struggles; and post-colonial analyses of current economic and political relations."
WSDB 494 "Advanced Tutorial in Womens Studies " "Prerequisite: Enrolment in a Womens Studies program; 24 university credits including WSDB 290, 291, 292, 380; and permission of the Institute. In addition, students must have a minimum GPA of 3.0 (B) and a demonstrated ability to carry out independent research. Tutorials are given only in exceptional circumstances and should consist of a topic not covered under the normal curriculum. A Tutorial Request form must be completed by the student and then approved by a full-time Simone de Beauvoir Institute faculty member acting as a supervisor."
WSDB 496 "Directed Research" "Prerequisite: Enrolment in the Specialization in Womens Studies; 30 credits, including WSDB 290, 291, 292, 380, 480, and permission of instructor. This course is designed for advanced students and is generally only available to students in their final 24 to 30 credits. Students are expected to produce a substantial research project and are supervised by full-time faculty."
WSDB 499 "Seminar in Womens Studies" ""
THEO 201 "Introduction to Theological Studies" "This course introduces students to the history, sources, and basic structure of Christian theology. A survey of certain interrelationships between theology and other disciplines is provided as well as an introduction to contemporary approaches to God and topics such as Jesus Christ, sin, and redemption."
THEO 202 "Introduction to Biblical Studies" "This course provides a survey of the contents of the Bible, from Genesis to Revelation, and a practical introduction to the skills required to understand biblical texts. Attention is paid to diverse approaches to interpretation which are used in historical, literary, or theological study of the Bible."
THEO 203 "Introduction to New Testament" "This course deals with the writings of the New Testament with an emphasis on both content and form. As well, students are introduced to the socio-political, economic, and cultural backdrops within which earliest Christianity arose and began to spread."
THEO 204 "Introduction to Christian Ethics" "This course is an introduction to the field of ethics in the context of Christian faith. Christian ethics is presented as an active quest towards understanding and guiding Christian moral living. There is a brief presentation of the historical background to Christian ethics, an exploration of the points of convergence with other religious traditions, as well as the interrelationship between morality and freedom. The course will include a reflection on the problem of evil as a diminishment of persons and societies as well as a section on moral development and moral maturity."
THEO 205 "Introduction to Christian Spirituality" "The characteristics of Christian spirituality, its roots in scripture, the balance between contemplation and action, its communal dimension, its attitude to the world, are analyzed through the study of a selection of men and women whose lives exemplify various aspects of Christian spirituality over the past two thousand years. The course examines notions of transcendence and immanence, individuality and collectivity, nature and the divine."
THEO 206 "Introduction to Christian Origins " "This course is a study of the historical origins of the Church with a view to understanding the creative originality of the Christian tradition. It explores possibilities for the rethinking of contemporary Christianity in light of the common sources of diverse Christian traditions."
THEO 212 "Faith, Reason and the Religious Sense" "This course investigates the basic human search for meaning and value in the context of the variety of models of revelation. It considers how religious experience is understood in the light of the psychology of religion and faith."
THEO 226 "Theology and Myth" "This course is a comparative study of mythology. The focus is on the role of myths in Christian theology, e.g. creation myths, origins of humanity, salvation myths, and others."
THEO 228 "(also listed as IRST 228)" ""
THEO 233 "Religious Pluralism in a Secular Culture" "This course focuses on the relationships between religion, pluralism, and secular culture. It deals specifically with secularization, secularism and theological responses that are rooted in historical discourses of church/state relations."
THEO 234 "Pilgrim Bodies, Sacred Journeys" "This course examines the history, politics, and spirituality of transformative journey in both theory and practice. Interdisciplinary exploration of a diversity of sources, including sacred texts and secular literature, art, architecture and music, as well as contemporary pop culture, facilitates a meaningful understanding and experience of pilgrimage as a growing postmodern phenomenon with an ancient global history. This course offers the opportunity for individual and group fieldwork, investigating the material, corporeal and performative dimensions of theology."
THEO 236 "Spirituality: Personal, Social and Religious Dimensions" "This course focuses on the phenomenon of spirituality as a personal and social response to the human quest for self-integration and self-transcendence. It examines the roles of both religious tradition and secular culture in shaping approaches to the spiritual journey. Consideration of the characteristics of Christian spiritual traditions is complemented by reflection upon the meaning and variety of spiritualities present in the pluralistic postmodern culture."
THEO 238 "Theology in Film" "This course examines a series of films to uncover their theological preoccupations, motives, and questions. Methods of analyses are discussed, in conjunction with screenings of selected films."
THEO 242 "Theology and the Arts" "This course explores a wide variety of ancient, modern, and contemporary artistic media  painting, sculpture, architecture, glass, music, literature, and multimedia  in order to uncover a theological understanding of artistic activity. It investigates the ways in which artists explore apprehensions of transcendence and the artistic imagination."
THEO 243 "Indigenous Spirituality" "This course explores Indigenous spirituality through its various epistemologies (ways of knowing) and axiologies (ways of acting). A key component of the course is studying the emerging field of Indigenous methodologies. Students encounter some of the many expressions of Indigenous spirituality, as it is concretely embedded in all aspects of existence (physical, emotional) and in all our relations, that is, to the land, to human and non-human animals, and to the spirit-imbued world surrounding us. Consideration is also given to the relationship between Indigenous and non-Indigenous spiritualites and methodologies."
THEO 245 "The Creative Self " "This course helps students explore their own creative processes in order to come to a deeper appreciation of the infinite human capacity for creation, and thus, self-transcendence. It considers the cognitive dimensions of the creative processes, their ethical aspects, their expression in human action, and their impact on ultimate value and meaning."
THEO 291 "The Icon: Theology in Colour" "The icon is both a theological medium and a theological message. The first is expressed by design, the latter by colour. The study of the icon offers the student an opportunity to explore theological meaning through image and symbolism as well as concept and reasoning."
THEO 295 "Theology and Women" "This course explores the emergence of a body of scholarly writing by women theologians. It looks at their questions and the critiques of traditional theological doctrines and interpretations, as well as suggesting different hermeneutical approaches to exegesis, theology, and history."
THEO 298 "Selected Topics in Theological Studies" ""
THEO 299 "Selected Topics in Theological Studies" ""
THEO 301 "The Pentateuch" "The objective of this course is to familiarize students with the first five books of the Bible, known as the Pentateuch. The course considers literary criticism pertaining to the composition of the Pentateuch, its themes, and their theological meanings."
THEO 302 "Historiographies in the Hebrew Bible" "Beginning with an introduction to biblical historiographies, this course discusses the Deuteronomistic historiography (Joshua, Judges, Books of Samuel, Books of Kings) and compares it to the historiography of Ezra/Nehemiah and Chronicles. Literary and theological issues are discussed throughout the course."
THEO 303 "Themes in the Hebrew Bible " "This course studies in depth the roots and developments of particular biblical traditions. It focuses on the history of different interpretations of such specific biblical themes as divine election, covenants, promises, worship, and sacrifices."
THEO 304 "Prophetic and Wisdom Literature in the Hebrew Bible " "This course introduces the prophetic, wisdom, and deuterocanonical books of the Hebrew Bible. Topics discussed are literary genres, historical contexts, and theological themes, as well as the phenomenon of prophecy in the ancient Near East, the historical settings for the biblical prophetic and wisdom literature, the language, and the message of these biblical books."
THEO 311 "Johannine Literature " "This course offers an in-depth study of the Gospel of John and the three letters of John. The differences between the Johannine school of thought and the Synoptic tradition (Matthew, Mark, and Luke) with respect to christology, faith, salvation, and the role of the spirit are examined."
THEO 315 "Gospels and Acts" "This course is an introduction to the texts and teachings of the four canonical Gospels and to the Acts of the Apostles."
THEO 317 "The Pauline Letters" "This course is an introduction to Paul and his letters. In studying these writings, students engage in close examination of parts of the text (exegesis) and also discover the history and context of earliest Christianity."
THEO 319 "Gnosticism and the New Testament" "This course introduces various Gnostic texts which are then compared and contrasted with the canonical Gospels of the New Testament. Themes such as salvific knowledge, cosmogony and creation, anthropogony, Christology, and soteriology are also considered from a comparative perspective."
THEO 320 "History of Christianity: The Medieval Period " "This course explores the history of Christianity from the fall of the Western Roman Empire in the fifth century to the beginning of the Renaissance in the 15th century. The diverging experiences of the churches in East and West are studied, with attention to the development of Christian beliefs, art, philosophy, and institutions, and the major religious and political figures who influenced these developments."
THEO 322 "History of Christianity: Reformation and Modernity" "This course explores the history of Christianity from the reformation through to the closing decades of the 20th century, with special attention given to the Protestant Reformation and to the impact of the Enlightenment on the theology, institutions, ethics, and intellectual life of modern Christians."
THEO 324 "Roman Catholicism" "This course offers an introduction to the contemporary Roman Catholic experience, and includes a treatment of the historical origins of Catholicism, its worship and liturgy, its spirituality, and its role in society and culture."
THEO 331 "The Christian Understanding of God" "This course examines the classical presentation of Christian belief in God as a Trinity of divine persons through its biblical origins and historical development. It also examines modern theological reflection on this classical view, including perspectives from non-Western cultural contexts."
THEO 333 "Jesus Christ in History and Faith" "This course studies the biblical and later traditions about the person, nature, and work of Christ in the Christian tradition. Texts studied include the Bible, theological texts from a variety of historical periods as well as some literary and artistic presentations of Christ."
THEO 337 "The Christian Sacraments" "This course examines the history, symbols, and images of ritual and liturgical communication in Christianity, especially in baptism and eucharist. These mysteries, as the Christian sacraments were originally called, are studied in the context of a Christian life."
THEO 343 "(also listed as POLI 389)" ""
THEO 347 "Spirituality of Aging " "This course deals with the spirituality of aging through a number of important themes: mid-life crises, intergenerational conflicts, sexuality, theology of the body, relationships, death and dying."
THEO 351 "Applied Ethical Issues" "This course provides students with a method for ethical deliberation and explores ethical issues challenging contemporary society such as euthanasia, health care, the economy, and scientific and technological advances."
THEO 353 "Theology and Bioethics" "This course presents major frameworks for examining issues in bioethics and explores case studies to familiarize students with ethical issues in the biomedical context. Ethical issues in health care and research involving human subjects in light of a theological perspective on life, death and moral existence are explored."
THEO 393 "Philosophical Foundations of Christian Theology" "Prerequisite: 24 credits. This survey course investigates the philosophical outlook and language of theological doctrines and Christian thinkers in various historical periods. Questions of truth, meaning, and goodness are examined in light of Christian interpretations of Plato and Aristotle. Contemporary topics at the intersection of philosophy and theology, such as human sexuality, political philosophy, and scientific theories, are also treated."
THEO 398 "Selected Topics in Theological Studies" ""
THEO 399 "Selected Topics in Theological Studies" ""
THEO 402 "Pastoral Ministry" "This course introduces students to the history and theology of pastoral ministry. Particular attention is given to theological sources and spiritual resources available to the minister in a variety of pastoral settings."
THEO 403 "Ignatian Spirituality: Theory and Method " "This course provides students with theoretical and methodological grounding in Ignatian spirituality specifically and in the academic study of Christian spirituality in general. The course introduces students to the Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius, situating the Exercises both in their historical context and within interpretations in contemporary culture. The goal of the course is to prepare students to engage in the role of directing spiritual exercises, to facilitate students understanding of the dynamics of the exercises and to explore the underlying anthropology and theology of the Ignatian exercises."
THEO 404 "Practicum in Pastoral Ministry" "Prerequisite: THEO 402 and permission of the Department. This course complements THEO 402 as the internship and field exploration of a particular pastoral ministry. It will be supervised by experts or experienced individuals in the various fields of ministry, e.g. eldercare, bereavement, hospital, school, youth ministries, and others."
THEO 406 "Scriptural Exegesis" "Prerequisite: THEO 202 or 203; THEO 301. This course initiates students in the historical-critical methodology used in the study of the Bible and familiarizes them with biblical research tools."
THEO 408 "Classical Theological Texts: Reading and Interpretation" "Prerequisite: THEO 201; THEO 331 or 333 or 337, or permission of the Department. This course provides students with the interpretive skills that permit critical responses to texts. Classical texts are analyzed in terms of the elements of context, structure, form, and content. The course covers classical theological writings from the fourth to the 20th century."
THEO 410 "Honours Tutorial" "Prerequisite: Permission of the Department; enrolment in the honours program. This course provides students with background studies in central theological issues and writers. Students prepare an annotated bibliography as part of the requirements of the course."
THEO 460 "Honours Essay" "Prerequisite: THEO 410 previously or concurrently; permission of the Department; enrolment in the honours program. Each student works with an individual faculty member in a particular area of theological studies to produce a research paper of about 40 pages in length."
THEO 492 "Biblical Hebrew I" "No prior knowledge of the Hebrew language is necessary. With a view to reading and comprehending simple biblical narratives in Hebrew, students learn the rudiments of Biblical Hebrew from the alphabet, vocabulary, and the basic grammar."
THEO 493 "Biblical Hebrew II " "Prerequisite: THEO 492. This course continues the objectives of Biblical Hebrew I. With a view to reading and comprehending simple biblical narratives in Hebrew, students learn problematic verb forms, grammatical constructions, and text linguistics. By the end of this course students are able to read, analyze, and translate biblical narratives."
THEO 495 "Biblical Greek I " "This is an introductory course to Greek Koine. No prior knowledge of the Greek language is necessary. It provides the student with a basic understanding of New Testament Greek."
THEO 496 "Biblical Greek II " "Prerequisite: THEO 495. This course builds on the material presented in Biblical Greek I. By the end of the course, students will be able to analyze and translate biblical texts."
THEO 497 "Selected Topics in Theological Studies" ""
THEO 498 "Selected Topics in Theological Studies" ""
THEO 499 "Advanced Topics in Theological Studies" ""
UNSS 200 "Self-Management Strategies" "Prerequisite: Faculty recommendation. Based on the principle of self-efficacy, this course is an introduction to self-management and self-assessment, exploring personal goal setting, time and stress management, mindfulness and motivation. Students gain an in-depth perspective of their individual strengths, develop strategies to deal with personal challenges, and enhance their motivation through exploring career directions. Each student works on an individual project designed to foster self-monitoring and self-reflection within the context of working towards success. A final portfolio compiled by each participant documents individual progress through the term. Successful completion of this pass/fail course depends on excellent attendance and timely completion of all assigned work."
UNSS 201 "Successful Study Strategies" "Prerequisite: UNSS 200 and Faculty recommendation. This course focuses on enhancing each students potential for academic success through developing strategies for active learning. Students explore techniques to enhance their understanding and retention of course material, including the principles of effective note-taking, active reading, preparing for exams and improving memory and concentration. Students are encouraged to apply these strategies in their other courses; for this reason, it is strongly recommended that this course be taken in conjunction with at least one other course. A final portfolio compiled by each participant demonstrates study strategies applied to discipline-specific coursework and reflects on the students progress through the term. Successful completion of this pass/fail course depends on excellent attendance and timely completion of all assigned work."
